THE AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA  
OF INDIA
PART- I
VOLUME – II
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH
Contents   |   Monographs   |   Abbrevations   |   Appendices
Legal Notices   |   General Notices
Note: This e-Book contains  Computer Database generated Monographs which are reproduced from official publication. The  
order of contents under the sections of Synonyms, Rasa, Guna, Virya, Vipaka, Karma, Formulations, Therapeutic uses may be 
shuffled, but the contents are same from the original source. However, in case of doubt, the user is advised to refer the official  
book.
i
CONTENTS
Legal Notices
General Notices
MONOGRAPHS
S No.Plant Name Botanical NamePage No.
(as per book)
1ËKËRAKARABHA (Root) Anacyclus pyrethrum DC 1
2AKâOÚA (Cotyledon) Juglans regia Linn 3
3ËMRËTA  (Stem Bark) Spondias pinnata Linn.f.Kurz. 5
4APËMËRGA  (Whole Plant) Achyranthes aspera Linn. 7
5APARËJITË (Root) Clitoria ternatea Linn 10
6ËRDRAKA (Rhizome) Zingiber officinale Rosc 12
7ARIMEDA (Stem Bark) Acacia leucophloea Willd. 15
8ARJUNA (Stem Bark) Terminalia arjuna W& A. 17
9BHALLËTAKA (Fruit) Semecarpus anacardium Linn 19
10BHÎ×GARËJA (Whole Plant) Eclipta alba Hassk 21
11BRËHMÌ (Whole Plant) Bacopa monnieri (Linn.) Wettst. 25
1212. BÎHATÌ (Root) Solanum indicum Linn 27
13CAVYA (Stem) Piper retrofractum Vahl. 29
14DËÚIMA (Seed) Punica granatum Linn 31
15DËRUHARIDRË (Stem) Berberis aristata DC 33
16DROÛAPUâPÌ  (Whole Plant) Leucas cephalotes Spreng. 35
17ERVËRU (Seed) Cucumis melo var utlissimus Duthie  
& Fuller 38
18GAJAPIPPALÌ (Fruit) Scindapsus officinalis Schooott 40
19GAMBHARI (Fruit) Gmelina arborea Roxb 42
20GË×GERU (Stem bark) Grewia tenax (Forsk.) Aschers &  
Schwf.44
21GUØJË (Root) Abrus precatorius Linn 46
22IKâU (Stem) Saccharum officnarum Linn 48
ii23INDRAVËRUÛÌ (Root) Citrullus colocynthus Schrad 50
24INDRAVËRUÛÌ (Leaf) Citrullus colocynthus Schrad 52
25JAMBÍ (Seed) Syzygium cuminii (Linn) Skeels 54
26JAMBÍ (Stem Bark) Syzygium cuminii (Linn) Skeels 56
27JAYAPËLA (Seed) Croton tiglium Linn  58
28JAYANÙÌ (Leaf) Sesbania sesban (Linn) Merr 60
29JYOTIâMATÌ (Seed) Celastrus paniculatus Willd. 62
30KADAMBA (Stem Bark) Anthocephalus cadamba Miz 64
31KËKAMËCÌ (Whole Plant) Solanum nugrum Linn 66
32KAMALA (Flower) Nelumbo nucifera Gaertn 69
33KAPITTHA (Fruit Pulp) Feronia linonia (Linn.) Swingle 71
34KARAMARDA (Stem Bark) Carissa carandas Linn 73
35KARAØJA (Root Bark) Pongamia pinnata (Linn) Merr. 75
36KARAØJA (Root) Pongamia pinnata (Linn) Merr. 77
37KARAØJA (Stem Bark) Pongamia pinnata (Linn) Merr. 79
38KARAØJA (Leaf) Pongamia pinnata (Linn) Merr. 81
39KËRAVALLAKA (Fresh Fruit) Momordica charantia Linn 83
40KAÙUKË (Rhizome) Picrorhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth. 85
41KOKILËKâË (Whole Plant) Asteracantha longifolia Nees 88
42KOKILËKâË (Root) Asteracantha longifolia Nees 91
43KOKILËKâË (Seed) Asteracantha longifolia Nees 93
44KOZUPPË (Whole Plant) Portulaca oleracea Linn. 95
45LAJJËLU (Whole Plant) Mimosa pudica Linn 98
46MADHÍKA  (Flower) Madhuca indical J.F.Gmel 102
47MATSYËKâÌ (Whole Plant) Alteranthera sessalis (Lilnn.) R.Br 104
48METHÌ (Seed) Trigonella foenum –graecum Linn 107
49MÍLAKA (Whole Plant) Raphanus sativus Linn 109
50MÍLAKA (Root) Raphanus sativus Linn 113
iii51MURË (Root) Selinum candollei DC 114
52MURVË (Root) Marsdenia tenacissima Wight & ARn 116
53NËGAKEáARA (Stamen) Mesua ferrea Linn 118
54NÌLÌ (Leaf) Indigofera tinctoria Linn 120
55NÌLÌ (Root) Indigofera tinctoria Linn 122
56NIMBA (Leaf) Azadirachta indica A. Juss 124
57NIMBA (Stem Bark) Azaduracgta ubduca A.Juss 126
58PALËSA (Stem Bark) Butea monosperma (Lam) Kuntze 128
59PËRIBHADRA (Stem Bark) Erythrina indica Lam 135
60PIPPALÌMÍLA (Stem) Piper longum Linn 133
61PLAKâA (Stem Bark) Ficus lacor Buch. Ham 137
62PRASËRIÛÌ (Whole Plant) Paedaria foetida Linn 137
63PRIYËLA (Seed) Buchnania lanzan Spreng. 143
64PRIYA×GU (Inflorescence) Calicarpa macrophylla Vahl 143
65áËLÌ (Root) Oryza sativa Linn 145
66áA×KHAPUâPÌ  (Whole Plant)  Convolvulvus pluricaulis Choisy 147
67SAPTALË (Whole Plant) Euphorbia dracunculoides Lam 150
68áATËHVË (Root) Anethum sowa Roxb.ex Flem . 153
69áIGRU (Leaf) Moringa oleifera Lam 155
70STHÍLAILË (Seed) Amomum subulatum Roxb 158
71TEJOVATÌ (Stem Bark) Zanthoxylum armatum DC 160
72TULASÌ (Whole Plant) Ocimum sanctum Linn 162
73TULASÌ (Leaf) Ocimum sanctum Linn 165
74VACË (Rhizome) Acorus calamus Linn 168
75VATSANËBHA (Root) Aconitum chasmanthum Staph Ex  
Holmes171
76VIDËRÌ (Tuberous Root) Puraria tuberose DC 173
77YAVA (Fruit) Hordeum vulgare Linn 175
iv78YAVËSAKA (Whole Plant) Alathi pseudalhagi (Bieb.) Desv 177
Appendix-1
1.1 Apparatus for Tests and Assays
1.1.1-Nessler Cylinder.
1.1.2-Sieves
1.1.2-Thermometers
1.1.4-Volumetric Glassware
1.1.5- Weights and Balances
Appendix-2
2.1 Testing Drugs
2.1.1- Systematic Study of Crude Drugs
2.1.2- Microscopic methods of Examining Crude Vegetable Drugs
2.1.3- Types of Stomata 
2.1.4- Determination of Stomatal Index
2.1.5-Determination of Palisade Ratio
2.1.6-Determination of Vein –Islet Number
2.1.7-Determination of Stomatal Number
2.2 Determination of Quantitative Data of Vegetable Drugs
2.2.1-Sampling of drugs
2.2.2- Foreign Matter and Determination of Foreign matter
2.2.3-Determination of Total Ash 
2.2.4-Determination of Acid Insoluble Ash 
2.2.5-Determination of Water Soluble Ash
2.2.6-Determination of Alcohol soluble Extractive
2.2.7-Determination of Water Soluble Extractive
2.2.8-Determination o of Ether Soluble Extractive (Fixed Oil Content)
2.2.9-Determination of Moisture Content (Loss on Drying)
2.2.10-Determination of Volatile Oil in Drugs
2.2.11-Special Processes used in Alkaloidal Assays
2.2.11-a-Continuous Extraction of Drugs
2.2.11-b-Tests for Complete Extraction of Alkaloids
2.2.12-Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC)
v2.3 Limit Tests
2.3.1- Limit Test for Arsenic
2.3.2-Limit Test for Chlorides
2.3.3-Limit Test for Heavy Metals
2.3.4-Limit Test for Iron 
2.3.5-Limit Test for lead
2.3.6-Sulphated Ash
2.3.7-Limit Test for Sulphates
Appendix-3
3.1 Physical Tests and determinations
2.3.1-Powder Fineness
2.3.2-Refractive Index
2.3.3-Weight per milliliter and Specific Gravity 
Appendix-4
4.1 Reagents and Solutions
Appendix-5
5.1- Weights and Measures
5.2- approximate Equivalents of Doses in Indian System and Metric System
Appendix- 6
Classical Ayurvedic References
Index
English equivalents of Ayurvedic clinical conditions and diseases 
viLEGAL NOTICES
In India there are laws dealing with drugs that are the subject of monographs  
which follow. These monographs should be read subject to the restrictions imposed  
by these laws wherever they are applicable.
It is expedient that enquiry be made in each case in order to ensure that the  
provisions of the law are being complied with.
In general, the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 (subsequently amended in 1964  
and 1982), the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 and the Poisons Act, 1919 and the rules  
framed thereunder should be consulted.
              Under the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India  
(A.P.I.), Part-I, Vol. II, is the book of standards for single drugs included therein and  
the standards prescribed in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, Part-I, Vol. II  
would be official. If considered necessary these standards can be amended and the  
Chairman of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee authorised to issue such  
amendments.  Whenever  such  amendments  are  issued  the  Ayurvedic  
Pharmacopoeia of India, Part-I, Vol. II, would be deemed to have been amended  
accordingly.
viiGENERAL NOTICES
Title - The title of the book is “ Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of 
Name of the Drugs - The name given on the top of each monograph of the drug is in  
Sanskrit as mentioned in the  Ayurvedic classics and/or in the  Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India , Part-I and Part-II will be considered official. These names have been arranged in  
English alphabetical order. The Latin name (taxonomical nomenclature) of each drug as  
found  in authentic  scientific  literature has  been provided  in the monograph  in  the  
introductory paragraph. The official name will be the main title of the drug and its  
scientific name will also be considered as legal name.
Introductory Para  - Each monograph begins with an introductory paragraph indicating  
the part, scientific name of the drug in Latin with short description about its habit,  
distribution and method of collection, if any.
Synonyms - Synonyms of each drug appearing in each monograph in Sanskrit, English,  
Hindi, Urdu and other Indian regional languages have been mentioned as found in the  
classical texts,  Ayurvedic Formulary of India, Part-I and Part-II as procured from the  
experts, scholars of Ayurveda and officials in the field from different states.
Italics - Italic type has been used for scientific name of the drug appearing in the  
introductory  paragraph  of  each  monograph  as  also  for  chemicals  and  reagents,  
substances or processes described in Appendix.
Odour and Taste - Wherever a specific odour has been found it has been mentioned  
but the description as ‘ odourless’ or ‘no odour’ has in many cases been avoided in the  
description,  as large numbers of drugs have got no specific  odour. The “odour” is 
examined by directly smelling 25 g of the powdered drug contained in a package or  
freshly powdered. If the odour is discernible the sample is rapidly transferred to an open  
container and re-examined after 15 minutes. If the odour persists to be discernible, it is  
described as having odour.
The “Taste” of a drug is examined by taking a small quantity of 85 mesh powder  
by a tip of moist glass rod and applying it on tongue previously rinsed with water. This  
may not be done in case if poisonous drugs, indicated in monograph.
Mesh Number - Wherever the powdering of the drug has been required the sieve “Mesh  
Number 85” has been used. This will not apply for drugs containing much oily substance.  
Weights and Measures -  The metric system of weights and measures is employed.  
Weights are given in multiples or fractions of a gramme (g) or of a milligram (mg). Fluid  
measures are given in multiples or fractions of millilitre (ml).
When the term “drop” is used, the measurement is to be made by means of a  
tube, which delivers in 20 drops 1 gram of distilled water at 15oC.
Metric measures are required by the Pharmacopoeia to be graduated at 20oC and 
all  measurements  involved  in  the  analytical  operations  of  the  Pharmacopoeia  are  
intended, unless otherwise stated to be made at that temperature.
Identity, Purity and Strength - Under the heading “Identification” tests are provided  
as an aid to identification and are described in their respective monographs.
viiiThe term “Foreign Matter” is used to designate any matter, which does not form  
part of the drug as defined in the monograph. Vegetable drugs used as such or in  
formulations, should be duly identified and authenticated and be free from insects,  
pests, fungi, micro-organisms, pesticides, and other animal matter including animal  
excreta, be within the permitted and specified limits for lead, arsenic and heavy metals,  
and  show  no  abnormal  odour,  colour,  sliminess,  mould  or  other  evidence  of  
deterioration.
The  quantitative  tests  e.g.  total  ash,  acid-insoluble  ash,  water-soluble  ash,  
alcohol-soluble extractive, water- soluble extractive, ether-soluble extractive, moisture  
content, volatile oil content and assays are the methods upon which the standards of  
Pharmacopoeia  depend.  The  methods  for  assays  are  described  in  their  respective  
monographs and for other quantitative tests, methods are not repeated in the text of  
monographs but only the corresponding reference of appropriate appendix is given. The  
analyst is not precluded from employing an alternate method in any instance if he is  
satisfied  that  the  method,  which  he  uses,  will  give  the  same  result  as  the  
Pharmacopoeial Method.  In  suitable  instances  the  methods  of  microanalysis,  if  of  
equivalent accuracy, may be substituted for the tests and assays described. However, in  
the event of doubt or dispute the methods of analysis of the Pharmacopoeia are alone  
authoritative.
Limits for Heavy Metals  – All Ayurvedic Drugs (Single/Compound formulation) must  
comply with the limits for Heavy Metals prescribed in individual Monograph and wherever  
limit is not given then they must comply with the limits given in WHO publication  
“Quality Control Methods for Medicinal Plants and Material”.
Standards - For statutory purpose, statements appearing in the API, Part-I, Vol. V,  
under Description, those of definition of the part and source plants, and Identity, Purity  
and Strength, shall constitute standards. 
Thin Layer Chromatography ( T.L.C.) - Under this head, wherever given, the number  
of spots and Rf values of the spots with their colour have been mentioned as a guide for  
identification of the drug and not as Pharmacopoeial requirement. However, the analyst  
may use any other solvent system and detecting reagent in any instance if he is satisfied  
that the method which he uses, even by applying known reference standards, will give  
better result to establish the identity of any particular chemical constituent reported to  
be present in the drug.
Quantities to be weighed for Assays and Tests - In all description quantity of the  
substance to be taken for testing is indicated. The amount stated is approximate but the  
quantity actually used must be accurately weighed and must not deviate by more than  
10 per cent from the one stated.
Constant Weight -  the term “Constant Weight” when it refers to drying or ignition  
means that two consecutive weighings do not differ by more than 1.0 mg per g of the  
substance taken for the determination, the second weighing following an additional hour  
of drying on further ignition.
Constituents - Under this head only the names of important chemical constituents,  
groups of constituents reported in research publications have been mentioned as a guide  
and not as pharmacopoeial requirement.
Percentage of Solutions -  In defining standards, the expression per cent (%), is used,  
according to circumstances, with one of the four meanings given below.
Per cent w/w (percentage weight in weight) expresses the number of grammes of 
active substance, in 100 grammes of product.        
ixPer cent w/v (Percentage weight in volume) expresses the number of grammes of 
active substance in 100 millilitres of product.        
Per cent v/v (percentage volume in volume) expresses the number of millilitres of 
active substance in 100 millilitres of product.        
         Per cent v/w (percentage volume in weight) expresses the number of millilitres of 
active substance in 100 grammes of product. 
Percentage of alcohol  - All statements of percentage of alcohol ( C2H5OH) refer to 
percentage by volume at 15.56 oC.        
Temperature - Unless otherwise specified all temperatures refer to centigrade ( celsius), 
thermometric scale.
Solutions - Unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph, all solutions are  
prepared with purified water.
Reagents  and  Solutions  -  The  chemicals  and  reagents  required  for  the  test  in  
Pharmacopoeia are described in Appendices.
Solubility - When stating the solubilities of Chemical substances the term “Soluble” is  
necessarily sometimes used in a general sense irrespective of concomitant chemical  
changes.
Statements of solubilities, which are expressed as a precise relation of weights of  
dissolved substance of volume of solvent, at a stated temperature, are intended to apply  
at that temperature. Statements of approximate  solubilities for which no figures are  
given, are intended to apply at ordinary room temperature.         
Pharmacopoeial chemicals when dissolved may show slight physical impurities,  
such as fragment of filter papers, fibres, and dust particles, unless excluded by definite  
tests in the individual monographs.
When the expression “parts” is used in defining the solubility of a substance, it is  
to be understood to mean that 1 gramme of a solid or 1 millilitre of a liquid is soluble in  
that number of millilitres of the solvent represented by the stated number of parts.
When  the  exact  solubility  of  pharmacopoeial substance  is  not  known,  a  
descriptive term is used to indicate its solubility. 
The following table indicates the meaning of such terms :-
Descriptive terms Relative quantities of solvent  
Very soluble Less than 1 part
Freely soluble From 1 to 10 parts
Soluble From 10 to 30 parts
Sparingly soluble From 30 to 100 parts
Slightly soluble From 100 to 1000 parts
Very slightly soluble From 1000 to 10,000 parts
Practically insoluble More than 10,000 parts
xTherapeutic  uses  and  important  formulations  –Therapeutic  uses and important  
formulations  mentioned  in  this  Pharmacopoeia  are,  as  provided  in  the  recognised 
Ayurvedic classics and in the Ayurvedic Formulary of India, Part –I and Part-II.
Doses – The doses mentioned in each monograph are in metric system of weights,  
which are the approximate conversions from classical weights mentioned in Ayurvedic  
texts. A conversion table is appended giving classical weights of Ayurvedic System of  
Medicine with their metric equivalents. Doses mentioned in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia  
of  India  (A.P.I.)  are  intended  merely  for  general  guidance  and  represent,  unless  
otherwise stated, the average range of quantities per dose which is generally regarded  
suitable by clinicians for adults only when administered orally.        
    It is to be noted that the relation between doses in metric and  Ayurvedic 
systems set forth in the text is of approximate equivalence. These quantities are for  
convenience of prescriber and sufficiently accurate for pharmaceutical purposes.
         The abbreviations commonly employed are as follows:                                         
      
Abbreviations of technical terms
m. Metre
l. Litre
mm. Millimetre
cm. Centimetre
µ. Micron (0.001 mm)
Kg. Kilogram
g. Gramme
mg. Milligram
ml. Millilitre
IN. Normal solution
0.5 N. Half-normal solution
0.1 N. Decinormal solution
1M. Molar solution
Fam. Family
PS. Primary Standards
TS. Transverse Section
xiAbbreviations used for Languages
Sansk. Sanskrit
Assam. Assamese
Beng. Bengali
Eng. English
Guj. Gujrati
Kan. Kannada
Kash. Kashmiri
Mal. Malayalam
Mar. Marathi
Ori. Oriya
Punj. Punjabi
Tam. Tamil
Tel. Telugu
ABBREVIATIONS FOR PARTS OF PLANTS
Cotyledon Cotldn.
Flower Fl.
Fruit Fr.
Heart Wood Ht. Wd.
Leaf Lf.
Pseudo-bulb Pseudo-bulb
Root Bark Rt. Bk.
Root Rt.
Rhizome Rz.
Seed Sd.
Stem Bark St. Bk.
Stem St.
Tuberous Root Tub. Rt.
Wood Wd.
Whole Plant Wh. Pl.
xii1. Akarakarabha (Rt.)  
ËKËRAKARABHA (Root) 
Ëk¡rakarabha consists of dried roots of Anacyclus pyrethrum  DC. (Fam. Asteraceae);  
an annual, hairy herb with numerous spreading prostrate or ascending branched stems. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Ëkallaka 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Akarakara 
English:Pellitory 
Gujrati  :Akkalkaro, Akkalgaro 
Hindi    :Akalkara 
Kannada:Akkallakara, Akallakara, Akalakarabha, Akkallaka Hommugulu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Akikaruka, Akravu 
Marathi:Akkalakara, Akkalakada 
Oriya   :Akarakara 
Punjabi:Akarakarabh, Akarakara 
Tamil   :Akkaraka, Akkarakaram 
Telugu  :Akkalakarra 
Urdu    :Aqaraqarha 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Roots tough, cylindrical, 7-15 cm in length, tapering slightly at both ends, with a  
few hairy rootlets and occasionally topped by bristly remains of leaves, external surface  
rough, brown, shrivelled, bark upto 3 mm thick, not easily separable, odour, slightly  
aromatic, taste, characteristically  astringent  and pungent,  on chewing  gives  tingling  
sensation to tongue and lips and causes excessive flow of saliva. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Root - Mature root shows cork consisting of tabular cells, many of which developed as  
sclerenchyma;  a  few  innercork  cells  contain  rosette  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  
secondary  cortex  consisting  of  isodiametric  or  tangentially,  elongated,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells; a few sclerenchymatous cells also found scattered in secondary  
cortex; secondary phloem consisting of usual elements, cambium 2-5 layered, secondary  
xylem very wide consisting of xylem vessels, tracheids and xylem parenchyma; vessels  
pitted, more or less in groups distributed throughout xylem, more and wider vessels  
found towards peripery, xylem fibres thick-walled, 1.37-28.8 µ in width, 53.2 - 231 µ in 
1length having narrow lumen, medullary rays numerous, running straight, bi to tri and  
multiseriate, uniseriate rays very rare, starting from primary xylem and reaching upto  
secondary cortex; ray cells thick-walled, radially elongated, inulin present in cells of  
secondary cortex, secondary phloem and medullary rays; oleo-resinous schizogenous  
glands  found  scattered  in secondary  cortex, secondary  phloem  and  medullary  rays;  
calcium oxalate crystals in rosette form present in secondary cortex, secondary phloem,  
secondary xylem and medullary ray cells. 
Powder - Ash coloured; shows vessels having scalariform thickening, rosette crystals of  
calcium oxalate and fragments of sclerenchyma; also gives positive tests for inulin. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    percent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10  percent, Appendix        2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    percent, Appendix       2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     8    percent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not More than     22  percent, Appendix      2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Volatile oil and Alkaloid (Pyrethrin).  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u 
Guna :RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :V¡tahara, Pittahara, Kaphahara, áukrala, V¡jikara, Svedakara, D¢pana,  
Buddhivardhaka, Balak¡rka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Kum¡ry¡sava, Kast£ry¡di (V¡yu) Gu¶ik¡, N¡gavallabha  
Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - Prati¿y¡ya, áotha, Aj¢rna, K¡sa, áv¡sa, Grdhras¢, PakÀ¡gh¡ta,  
Udararoga, NaÀ¶¡rtava, á£laroga, Danta¿£la 
DOSE  - 0.5 -1 g. of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
22. Akshoda (Cotldn.)  
AKâOÚA (Cotyledon) 
AkÀo·a consists of dried cotyledons of Juglans regia Linn. (Fam. Juglandaceae); a  
large deciduous, monoecious tree with tomentose shoots, found throughout the Himalayas  
upto an altitude of 900-3300 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:AkÀo¶a, Sailabhava, Karparala 
Assamese:Akalbasing 
Bengali:Aakharotu 
English:Walnut 
Gujrati  :Akharoda 
Hindi    :Akharot 
Kannada:Akrod pappu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Akrottu 
Marathi:Akrod 
Oriya   :Akhrot 
Punjabi:Akharota 
Tamil   :Akrotu 
Telugu  :Akrotu 
Urdu    :Akhrot 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Cotyledons  available in  2-3 cm long, slightly  curved, coriaceous, irregularly  
corrugated, broken pieces, creamish-brown, odour, not distinct; taste, oily sweet.
 
b) Microscopic 
Cotyledon -  Shows 1-2 layered, radially elongated, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells,  
raised  stomata  with  more  or  less  curved  guard  cells,  followed  by  more  or  less  
compressed,  collapsed,  paranchymatous  cells  having  vascular  bundles;  under  this,  
indistinct  tangentially  elongated  cells  present;  endosperm  mostly  single  layered;  
cotyledons consisting of a wide zone of oval to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous  
cells, small aleurone grains and fat present in endosperm and cotyledons.
Powder - Cream coloured, shows groups of cells of cotyledon, abundance of round oil  
globules and rarely vessels.
3IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  5 percent, Appendix           2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  2 percent, Appendix           2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than  0.5 percent, Appendix         2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than  10.0 percent, Appendix        2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than  7.0 percent, Appendix         2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Walnut oil and Tannin. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Sara, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :V¡tahara, Kaphakara, B¤´ha¸a, áukral, Balya, V¤Àya, ViÀ¶ambhi, H
¤dya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Am¥tapr¡¿a Gh¤ta. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - KÀata, KÀaya, V¡taroga. 
DOSE  - 10 - 25 g.  
   
  
43. Amrata (St.Bk.)  
ËMRËTA  (Stem Bark) 
Ëmr¡ta consists of dried stem bark of  Spondias pinnata  Linn. f. Kurz. Syn.  S. 
mangifera  Willd.;  S.  acuminata  Roxb.  non  Gamble  (Fam.  Anacardiaceae);  a  small  
aromatic, deciduous tree, upto 27 m high and 2.5 m in girth, found wild or cultivated  
almost throughout the country and in the Andamans ascending upto an altitude of 1500 m  
in the Himalayas.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Ëmr¡taka, Marka¶¡mra 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Amada, Amra 
English:Indian Hog Plum, Wild Mango 
Gujrati  :Ambeda, Ambado, Ranamba, Jangali Ambo, Ranambo 
Hindi    :Ambada, Amra, Jangli Aam 
Kannada:Ambate, Amvara 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Mampusli,  Ambalam,  Ambazham,  Mampuiti,  Ampozham  
Njettikuzhiyan mavu. 
Marathi:Ambado 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Amada 
Tamil   :Mambulichi Amputtai, Ambadam 
Telugu  :Amratakamu, Anbalamu, Adavimamidi 
Urdu    :Jangli Aam 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in the form of 2-7 cm long cut pieces, curved, thin, external surface  
smooth, grey having lenticels, internal surface reddish-yellow; fracture, laminated.
 
b) Microscopic 
Stem Bark-  Mature bark shows  cork  as a wide zone  of  15-25  rows, consisting  of  
tangentially elongated, radially arranged, thin-walled cells, a few outer cells exfoliated;  
secondary cortex consisting of tangentially elongated, parenchymatous cells, which are  
thick-walled towards periphery, first followed by a zone of compactly arranged cells  
filled with rosette and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and next by another wider  
zone of compactly arranged stone cells; rest of the cells following the stone cell zone are  
thin-walled, tangentially elongated, parenchymatous, with reddish-brown contents, and  
5also rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; simple, round to oval starch grains measuring  
2.75-14  µ in dia., a few prismatic crystals present in this zone; secondary phloem  
consisting of usual elements, phloem fibres arranged in tangential bands, thick-walled,  
lignified, alternating with the patches of phloem fibres, prominent lysogenous cavities  
are present, surrounded by a number of tannin sacs; phloem parenchyma consisting of  
thin walled cells, containing rosette crystals and starch grains, similar to those found  
scattered in secondary cortex. 
Powder - Light brown; shows cork cells, stone cells, phloem fibres measuring 800-1000  
µ in length and 14-28 µ in width, rosette and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and  
numerous rounded to oval starch grains, measuring 3-14 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1   per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  13  per cent, Appendix        2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than 0.5  per cent, Appendix        2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than    3   per cent, Appendix      2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    7   per cent, Appendix      2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica Gel 'G' using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4:1 :5) shows three spots at Rf. 0.33, 0.40 and 0.87 (all greyish brown). Under  
U.V.  (366  nm)  one  fluorescent  zone  is  visible  at  Rf.  0.96.  On  spraying  with  5%  
Methanolic-Phosphomolybdic acid reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at  
110°C three spots appear at Rf. 0.33.(greyish brown), 0.87 (blue) and 0.96 (blue). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannin and Starch
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Amla, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :-- 
Karma :Kaphakara,  V¡tahara,  Pittakara,  Rucik¤t,  Ka¸¶hya,  ËmadoÀahara  H
¤dya, Vahnikara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - D¡dhika Gh¤ta. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - KÀata, KÀaya, Raktapitta, D¡ha 
DOSE  - 5-10 g. of the drug in powder form for decoction.  
64. Apamarga (W.P.) 
APËMËRGA  (Whole Plant)  
Ap¡m¡rga  consists  of  dried  whole  plant  of  Achyranthes  aspera  Linn.  (Fam. 
Amaranthaceae); a stiff, erect, 0.3-0.9 m high herb, found commonly as a weed throughout  
India up to 900 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:May£ra, May£raka, PratyakpuÀpa, Kharamaµjar, áikhari 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Apamg 
English:Prickly Chaff Flower 
Gujrati  :Aghedo 
Hindi    :Chirchita, Latjira 
Kannada:Uttarani 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Katalati 
Marathi:Aghada 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Puthakanda 
Tamil   :Nayuruvi 
Telugu  :Uttarenu 
Urdu    :Chirchita 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Cylindrical tap root, slightly ribbed, 0.1-1.0 cm in thickness, gradually tapering,  
rough  due  to  presence  of  some  root  scars,  secondary  and  tertiary  roots  present,  
yellowish-brown; odour, not distinct. 
Stem - 0.3 - 0.5 cm in cut pieces, yellowish-brown, erect, branched, cylindrical, hairy,  
solid, hollow when dry.
Leaf -  Simple,  subsessile,  exstipulate,  opposite,  decussate,  wavy  margin,  obovate,  
slightly acuminate and pubescent due to the presence of thick coat of long simple hairs. 
Flower - Arranged in inflorescence of long spikes, greenish-white, numerous, sessile,  
bracteate with two bracteoles, one spine lipped, bisexual, actinomorphic, hypogynous;  
perianth segments 5,free, membranous, contorted or quincuncial, stamens 5, opposite,  
the perianth lobes, connate forming a membranous tube-like structure, alternating with  
truncate  and  fimbriate  staminodes,  filament  short;  anther,  two  celled,  dorsifixed;  
7gynoecium bicarpellary, syncarpous; ovary superior, unilocular with single ovule; style,  
single; stigma, capitate. 
Fruit - An indehiscent dry utricle enclosed within persistent, perianth and bracteoles, 
Seed - Sub-cylindric, truncate at the apex, round at the base, endospermic, brown. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Root - Mature root shows 3-8 layered, rectangular, tangentially elongated, thin-walled  
cork cells; secondary cortex consisting of 6-9 layers, oval to rectangular, thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells having a few scattered single or groups of stone cells; followed by  
4-6  discontinuous  rings  of  anomalous  secondary  thickening  composed  of  vascular  
tissues; small patches of sieve tubes distinct in phloem parenchyma, demarcating the  
xylem rings; xylem composed of usual elements; vessels simple pitted; medullary rays  
1-3 cells wide; small prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate present in cortical region and  
numerous in medullary rays.
Stem - Young stem shows 6-10 prominent ridges, which diminish downwards upto the  
base where it becomes almost cylindrical; epidermis single layered, covered by thick  
cuticle having uniseriate, 2-5 celled, covering trichomes and glandular with globular  
head, 3-4 celled stalk; cortex 6-10 layered, composed of parenchymatous cells, most of  
them  containing  rosette  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  in  the  ridges  cortex  
collenchymatous; vascular bundles lie facing each ridge capped by pericyclic fibres;  
transverse section of mature stem shows lignified, thin-walled cork cells; pericycle a  
discontinuous  ring  of  lignified  fibres;  vascular  tissues  show  anomalous  secondary  
growth having 4-6 incomplete rings of xylem and phloem; secondary phloem consisting  
of usual elements form incomplete rings; cambial strip present between secondary xylem  
and phloem; secondary xylem consisting of usual elements, fibres being absent; vessels  
annular,  spiral,  scalariform  and  pitted,  fibres  pitted,  elongated,  lignified;  pith  wide  
consisting of oval to polygonal, parenchymatous cells; two medullary bundles, either  
separate throughout or found in some cases, present in pith; micro-sphenoidal silica  
crystals present in some epidermal, cortical and pith cells. 
Leaf-
Petiole -  Shows  crescent-shaped  outline,  having  single-layered  epidermis  with  
thickcuticle; ground tissues consisting of thin-walled, parenchymatous cells containing  
rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; 4-5 vascular bundle situated in mid region. 
Midrib - Shows a single layered epidermis, on both surfaces; epidermis followed by 4-5  
layered  collenchyma  on  upper  side  and  2-3  layered  on  lower  side;  ground  tissue  
consisting of thin-walled, parenchymatous cells having a number of vascular bundles;  
each vascular bundle shows below the xylem vessels, thin layers of cambium, followed  
8by phloem and a pericycle represented by 2-3 layers of thick-walled, non-lignified cells;  
rosette crystals of calcium oxalate found scattered in ground tissues. 
Lamina - Shows single layered, tangentially elongated epidermis cells covered with thick  
cuticle having covering trichomes which are similar to those of stem found on both  
surfaces; mesophyll differentiated into palisade and spongy parenchyma; palisade 2-4  
layered  of  thick  parenchyma  larger,  slightly  elongated  in  upper, while  smaller  and  
rectangular  in  lower  surface;  spongy  parenchyma  3-5  layers  thick,  more  or  less  
isodiametic parenchymatous cells; idioblast containing large rosette crystals of calcium  
oxalate distributed in palisade and spongy parenchyma cells; stomata anisocytic and  
anomoacytic in both surface; stomatal index 4.5-9.0 on upper surface, 9.0-20.0 on lower  
surface; palisade ratio 7.0-11; vein islet number 7-13 per sq. mm. 
Powder -  Light  yellow;  shows  fragments  of  elongated,  rectangular,  thin-walled  
epidermal cells, aseptate fibres,  vessels  with  annular,  spiral,  scalariform  and  pitted  
thickening, uniseriate hair with bulbous base, rosette and prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2  per cent, Appendix        2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than 17  per cent, Appendix         2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than  5    per cent, Appendix       2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than    2   per cent, Appendix      2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than   12  per cent, Appendix       2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Saponins 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Sara, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphahara, V¡tahara, Medohara, Chedana, P¡cana, V¡maka,  
áirovirecana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Ap¡m¡rgakÀ¡ra, Ap¡m¡rgakÀ¡ra Taila, Abhay¡ Lava¸a,  
Gu·apippali, JyotiÀmati  Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - á£la, Udara Roga, Apac¢, Ar¿a, Ka¸·u, Medoroga 
DOSE  - 20-50 g. of the drug for decoction. 
95. Aparajita (Rt.)  
APARËJITË (Root) 
Apar¡jit¡  consists  of  dried  root  of  Clitoria  ternatea  Linn.  (Fam.  Fabaceae);  a  
perennial climber with slender downy stem, found throughout the tropical regions of the  
country being cultivated in gardens every where and often also found growing over hedges  
and thickets. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Girikar¸ik¡, ViÀ¸ukr¡nt¡ 
Assamese:Aparajita 
Bengali:Aparajita 
English:Clitoria 
Gujrati  :Gokarni 
Hindi    :Aparajita 
Kannada:Girikarnika Balli, Girikarnika 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Shankhapushapam 
Marathi:Gokarna, Aparajita 
Oriya   :Aparajita 
Punjabi:Koyal 
Tamil   :Kakkanam 
Telugu  :Dintena 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug consisting of a stout tap root with a few tortuous branches, cylindrical, 1-5  
mm in thickness, a few places show cracks due to presence of lenticels, colour, light-
brown, fracture, fibrous; taste, bitter.
 
b) Microscopic 
Root - Shows 10-20 or more layers of rectangular, thin-walled, tangentially elongated  
exfoliating cork cells; secondary cortex consists of 10-12 rows of large, polygonal, thin  
walled cells filled with starch grains, a few cells contain prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate in this region; single or groups of 2-10 lignified cortical fibres, distributed in the  
lower half of the cortex; secondary phloem consists of usual elements; phloem fibres 2-8  
in groups, a few solitary fibres also present, very long, thin-walled with narrow lumen  
and pointed tips; secondary xylem consists of usual elements; vessels pitted with oblong,  
bordered pits and have short conical tail at one end, mostly occur 2 or 3 in groups;  
xylem fibres similar to those of phloem fibres, a few showing slit-like pits; medullary  
10rays 1-5 cells wide, oblong and pitted; xylem parenchyma irregular in shape and pitted  
walls; starch grains simple as well as compound having 2-6 components, single grains  
measuring 3-13 µ in dia., found in secondary cortex, phloem and xylem parenchyma.
Powder - Yellowish-brown; shows simple and compound starch grains, measuring 3-13  
µ  in dia., vessels with oblong bordered pits and fragments of fibres. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2   per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5   per cent, Appendix       2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2   per cent, Appendix       2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than    5    per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    8    per cent, Appendix     2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  alcoholic  extract  of  the  drug  on  Silica  gel  'G'  using  Chloroform:  
Ethylacetate : Formic Acid (5:4:1) v/v shows one spot at Rf. 0.79 (dull yellow) in visible  
light. Under U.V. (366 nm) a spot is seen at Rf. 0.79 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour  
two spots appear at Rf. 0.54 and 0.79 (both yellow). On spraying with 10% aqueous  
solution of Ferric Chloride and heating the plate at 105 ° C for about fifteen minutes one  
spots appears at Rf. 0.79 (grey). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannin, Starch, Resin, Taraxerol & Taraxerone. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :-- 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Ka¸¶hya,  Kaphahara,  Pittahara,  V¡tahara,  Medhya,  ViÀahara,  
Buddhiprada, CakÀuÀya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Mi¿raka Sneha, V¡tarakt¡ntaka Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - á£la, áotha, KuÀ¶ha, M£traroga, Vra¸a 
DOSE  - 1 - 3 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
116. Ardraka (Rz.)  
ËRDRAKA (Rhizome) 
Ërdraka  consists  of  fresh  rhizome  of  Zingiber  officinale  Rosc.  (Fam. 
Zingiberaceae); a herbaceous rhizomatous perennial, reaching up to 90 cm in height,  
widely cultivated in India. Rhizomes are dug in January-February, buds and roots are  
removed and washed well.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Ka¶ubhadra, á¤´gavera 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Ada 
English:Ginger 
Gujrati  :Adu 
Hindi    :Adarakha 
Kannada:Alla, Hasishunti 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Inchi 
Marathi:Ardrak, Ale 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Adi, Adrak 
Tamil   :Injee, Allam, lakottai, Inji 
Telugu  :Allamu, Allam 
Urdu    :Adrak 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs as entire rhizome or in pieces, rhizome laterally compressed bearing  
flattish ovate, oblique branches on upper side, each having a depressed scar at its apex,  
pieces 5-15 cm long, 1.5-6.5 cm wide (usually 3-4 cm) and 1-1.5 cm thick, fracture,  
short with projecting fibres, transversely cut surface shows a wide central stele having  
numerous greyish cut ends of fibres and yellow secreting cells; odour, gingery; taste,  
pungent
 
b) Microscopic 
Rhizome - Shows a few layered, irregularly arranged, tangentially elongated,  
brown cells of outer cork and 6-12 rows of thin-walled, colourless, radially arranged  
cells of inner cork; secondary cortex consisting of hexagonal to polygonal, isodiametric,  
thin-walled, parenchymatous cells containing numerous circular to oval starch grains  
with striations and hilum at one end with clear concentric striations, measuring 5-25 µ  in 
12dia., idioblasts containing large yellowish to brownish globules of oleo-resin; walls of oil  
cells suberised; numerous closed, conjoint, collateral, cortical fibro-vascular bundles  
scattered throughout cortical zone, greater number occurring in inner cortical region,  
larger bundles consists of 2- 7 vessels, small cells of sieve tube, polygonal cells of  
parenchyma  and  group  of  fibres;  vessels  showing  reticulate,  scalariforrn  and  spiral  
thickening; fibres septate with a few oblique pores on their walls; endodermis single  
layered, free from starch; pericycle single layered enclosing central stele; stele consisting  
of thin-walled polygonal, isodiametric cells of parenchyma, filled with abundant starch  
grains, oleo-resin cells similar to those present in cortex; fibrovascular bundles of two  
types, those arranged along pericycle in a definite ring are smaller in size and devoid of  
fibres, vessels 2-5 in number, larger bundles found scattered throughout stele, composed  
of xylem, phloem, parenchyma and sheath of sclerenchyma. 
Powder -Light  yellow;  shows  thin-walled  parenchymatous  cells,  septate  fibres  with  
oblique,  elongated  pits on their  walls, reticulate and spiral vessels, oleo-resin cells  
abundent, single starch grains of varying shapes with eccentric hilum, measuring 5-25 µ 
in diameter.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  0.5   per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than    8    per cent, Appendix     2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than    1   per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than      5   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     2  per cent, Appendix      2.2.7. 
Moisture content                        Not more than       90 per cent, Appendix    2.2.9 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Benzene: Ethyl  
acetate (9: 1) in visible light four spots are seen at Rf 0.16, 0.35, 0.63 & 0.69 (all light  
yellow). Under U.V. (366 nm) three fluorescent zones appear at Rf. 0.16 (blue), 0.63  
(grey) & 0.69 (grey). On exposure to Iodine vapour eleven spots appear at Rf. 0.03, 0.08,  
0.13, 0.16, 0.35, 0.47, 0.63, 0.69, 0.76, 0.83 & 0.92 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin  
Sulphuric acid reagent & heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C eight spots appear at  
Rf. 0.08 (violet), 0.l6 (brownish violet), 0.35 (light violet), 0.47 (light violet), 0.63 (light  
violet), 0.69 (light violet), 0.76 (violet) & 0.92 (violet).
  
CONSTITUENTS   - Volatile Oil containing Cineole zingiberol, and sesquiterpene like  
zingiberene, bisobolene and sesqui phellandrene, gingerosol in the  
oleo-resin.
 
 
13PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :D¢pana, H¤dya, Kaphahara, V¡tahara, Rocana, Bhedana, Svarya, V
¤Àaya. 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Ërdraka Kha¸·¡valeha, S¡rasvat¡riÀ¶a. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - á£la, Vibandha, Ën¡ha, áopha, Ka¸tharoga. 
DOSE  - 2-3 ml of the drug in juice form with honey. 
   
  
147. Arimeda (St.Bk.)  
ARIMEDA (Stem Bark)  
Arimeda consists of dried stem bark of Acacia leucophloea Willd. (Fam. Fabaceae);  
a moderate-sized deciduous tree, upto 3 m in height, characteristic of dry regions, found in  
the plains of Punjab and in the dry forest tracts throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Irimeda, Vi·khadir 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Guyababla, Sadabala 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Haramibaval, Pilobaval, Haribaval 
Hindi    :Arimeda 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Karivelam, Velvelam, Velvelakam 
Marathi:Pandal Babal 
Oriya   :Arimeda 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Velvelam 
Telugu  :-- 
Urdu    :Guar babool 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Mature bark 0.5-1 cm thick, hard, rough, incurved, exfoliating in irregular scales,  
externally yellowish-grey or almost black and longitudinally fissured, internally light  
brown to reddish-brown, internal surface longitudinally striated and fibrous, fracture,  
fibrous; odour and taste, not distinct. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Stem Bark -Mature bark shows dead tissues of rhytidoma consisting of cork cells, thin-
walled cortical cells, stone cells and phloem cells, traversed by multiseriate medullary  
rays; cork consisting of 4-8 layers of thin-walled, square to rectangular cells, followed  
by numerous groups of sclereids of various shapes and sizes; secondary phloem wide,  
consisting of sieve elements, parenchyma, fibres and crystal fibres, all traversed by  
medullary  rays;  sieve  elements  get  collapsed  in  outer  and  middle  region  forming  
tangential bands of ceratenchyma; phloem parenchyma thin-walled some cells contain  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; phloem fibres thin-walled, lignified, with tapering  
15ends, arranged in more or less concentric bands forming tangential strips alternating  
with-thinwalled  phloem  elements;  crystal  fibres  elongated,  thick-walled  having  
numerous chambers containing a prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate in each chamber;  
medullary  rays  multiseriate  dilating  towards  outer  side,  composed  of  thin-walled,  
radially elongated cells. 
Powder - Reddish-brown; shows groups of cork cells, sclereid, fibres, crystal fibres and  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2   per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11  per cent, Appendix       2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than    1   per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     14  per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     13  per cent, Appendix     2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.LC.  of  alcoholic  extract  of  drug  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Chloroform:  
Ethylacetate : Formic Acid (54: 1) only one spot at Rf 0.69 (grey) is seen in visible light.  
Under  UV  (366  nm)  two  fluorescent  zones  appear  at  Rf.0.78  and  0.91  (both  blue).On  
exposure to Iodine vapour a yellow coloured tailing appears from Rf.0 to 0.39 and a spot at  
Rf. 0.91 (yellow). On spraying with 10% aqueous Ferric Chloride solution a bluish grey  
coloured tailing appears from Rf. 0 to 0.39 and a spot at Rf. 0.91 (bluish grey)  
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  n-Hexacosanol, β -Amyrin, β-Sitosterol and Tannin. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :UÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kapha¿osaka, Meda¿oÀaka, ViÀan¡¿ana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Khadir¡di Gu¶ika (Mukharoga), Arimed¡di Taila (For  
external use i.e. Kavalagraha and Nasya) 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - áopha, K¡sa, Ka¸·u, KuÀ¶ha, Meha, Mukharoga, ViÀajavra¸a,  
Atis¡ra, Visarpa, P¡¸·u, Dantaroga, K¤mi, Udardapra áamana 
DOSE  - 40 g for decoction.3-5 g in powder form. 
168. Arjuna (St.Bk.)  
ARJUNA (Stem Bark)  
Arjuna  consists  of  the  stem  bark  of  Terminalia  arjuna  W.&  A.  (Fam. 
Combretaceae); a large deciduous tree, commonly found throughout the greater parts of the  
country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Kakubha, P¡rtha, ávetav¡ha 
Assamese:Arjun 
Bengali:Arjuna 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Sadad, Arjuna, Sajada 
Hindi    :Arjuna 
Kannada:Matti, Bilimatti, Neermatti, Mathichakke, Kudare Kivimase 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Nirmasuthu, Vellamaruthi, Kellemasuthu, Mattimora, Torematti 
Marathi:Arjuna, Sadada 
Oriya   :Arjuna 
Punjabi:Arjon 
Tamil   :Marudam 
Telugu  :Maddi 
Urdu    :Arjun 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark available in pieces, flat, curved, recurved, channelled to half quilled, 0.2-1.5  
cm thick, market samples upto 10 cm in length and upto 7 cm in width, outer surface  
somewhat smooth and grey, inner surface somewhat fibrous and pinkish, transversely cut  
smoothened bark shows pinkish surface, fracture, short in inner and laminated in outer  
part; taste, bitter and astringent.
b) Microscopic 
Stem Bark -Mature bark shows cork consisting of 9-10 layers of tangentially elongated  
cells,  a  few  outer  layers  filled  with  brown  colouring  matter;  cork  cambium  and  
secondary cortex not distinct and medullary rays observed traversing almost upto outer  
bark; secondary phloem occupies a wide zone, consisting of sieve tubes, companion  
cells,  phloem  parenchyma  and  phloem  fibres,  traversed  by  phloem  rays,  usually  
uniseriate but biseriate rays also occasionally seen; in the middle and outer phloem  
region, sieve tubes get collapsed and form ceratenchyma; phloem fibres distributed in  
rows and present in groups of 2-10; rosette crystals of calcium oxalate measuring 80-180  
17µ in dia., present in most of the phloem parenchyma, alternating with fibres; idioblasts  
consisting  of large cells having aggregates of  prismatic and rhomboidal  crystals  of  
calcium oxalate in row throughout the zone, measuring 260-600 µ in dia., starch grains,  
mostly simple, compound of 2-3 components, sometimes upto 5 components, round to  
oval, elliptical, measuring 5-13 µ in dia., distributed throughout the tissue (absent in T.  
alata); in a tangential section the uniseriate phloem rays 2-10 cells high and biseriate,  
4-12 cells high; in longitudinal section rosette crystals of calcium oxalate found in the  
form of strands in phloem parenchyma. 
Powder - Reddish-brown; shows fragments of cork cells, uniseriate phloem rays, fibres,  
a number of rosette crystals of calcium oxalate, a few rhomboidal crystals, starch grains  
simple and compound, round to oval, elliptic, having 2-3 components with concentric  
striations and small narrow hilum, measuring 5-13 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  2   per cent, Appendix        2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  25  per cent, Appendix        2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than  1    per cent, Appendix       2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than    20   per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    20    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannins 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Bhagnasandh¡nakara, H¤dya, Kaphahara, Pittahara, Vra¸an¡¿ana, Vya
´ga Hara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - P¡rth¡dyariÀ¶a, N¡g¡rjun¡bhra Rasa, Arjuna Gh¤ta. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Medoroga, Vra¸a, H¤droga, KÀatakÀaya, Prameha, T¤À¡, Vya´ga. 
DOSE  - 3-6 g. of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
189. Bhallataka (Fr.)  
BHALLËTAKA (Fruit) 
Bhall¡taka  consists  of  mature  fruit  of  Semecarpus  anacardium  Linn.  (Fam. 
Anacardiaceae), a medium sized tree found in moist deciduous forests all over the country.  
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:AruÀkara, Bhall¡ta 
Assamese:Bhelaguti 
Bengali:Bhela 
English:Marking Nut 
Gujrati  :Bhilam 
Hindi    :Bhilawa 
Kannada:Bhallataka 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Chera 
Marathi:Bibba 
Oriya   :Bhollataki, Bholai 
Punjabi:Bhilawa 
Tamil   :Tatamkottai, Scramkotati 
Telugu  :Nallajidi, Nallajidiginga 
Urdu    :Baladur, Bhilavan 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit laterally flattened, drupaceous, dark brown, nut 2.5-3 cm long, obliquely  
ovoid, smooth, shining with residual receptacle. 
b) Microscopic 
Fruit -  Pericarp differentiated  into epicarp, mesocarp  and  endocarp; in longitudinal  
section pericarp shows outer epicarp consisting of single layer of epidermal cells which  
are elongated radially and lignified, characteristic glands found in pericarp which exude  
oil globules and arise as small protuberances in epicarp and due to pressure exerted by  
cells of mesocarp, some of epidermal cells and cuticle rupture and oil globules exude  
from oil glands; mesocarp a very broad zone, 30-40 layers thick, composed mostly of  
parenchymatous  cells  having  lysigenous  cavities  and  fibro-vascular  bundles,  below  
epidermis a few outer cells of parenchyma smaller as compared to rest; rosette crystals  
of calcium oxalate found scattered in parenchymatous cells, some cells get dissolved and  
form lysigenous cavities which increase in size with maturity of fruit, cavities do not  
have  any  special  lining  and  contain  an  acrid  and  irritant  yellowish  oily  secretion;  
19endocarp consists of two distinct layers, innermost prismatic, very much elongated radial  
walls, being highly thickened, outer layer shorter and thinner than prismatic layer but  
cells similar to the former; number of mesocarp parenchyma contain rosette crystals of  
calcium oxalate and oil drops in oil glands; lysigenous cavities of mesocarp contain oily  
vesicating substance, insoluble in water and soluble in alcohol, ether, chloroform. 
Powder - Dark-brown; shows rosette crystals of calcium oxalate and oil globules. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1   per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   4  per cent, Appendix        2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than    11  per cent, Appendix      2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    5  per cent, Appendix       2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - A Tarry Oil containing Anacardic Acid, Non-Volatile Alcohol (Cardol).  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphahara, P¡cana, V¡tahara, Chedi, Bhedi, Medhya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - Am¤ta Bhall¡taka Leha, Saµj¢vani Va¶¢., Bhall¡taka  
Ras¡yana, Bhall¡tak¡di Modaka 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Ar¿a, Ën¡ha, Graha¸¢, Gulma, Krimi, KuÀ¶ha. 
DOSE  - 1.2 g. of the drug in Ksirapaka form. 
Note - For Bhall¡taka Àodhan see A.F.I., Part-I 
   
  
2010. Bhringaraja (W.P.)  
BHÎ×GARËJA (Whole Plant) 
Bh¤´gar¡ja consists of whole plant of  Eclipta alba  Hassk. (Fam. Asteraceae); a  
herbaceous annual, 30 - 50 cm high, erect or prostrate, much branched, strigosely hirsute,  
often rooting at nodes, a common weed of moist places found throughout India ascending  
upto 1700 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Ke¿ar¡ja, Tekar¡ja, Bh¤´ga, M¡rkava, Bh¤´gaja 
Assamese:Bhrngaraja 
Bengali:Bheemraja, Kesuriya, Kesari 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Bhangaro, Bhangro 
Hindi    :Bhangara, Bhangaraiya 
Kannada:Garujalu, Gurugada, Soppu, Keshavardhana, Kodigaraju 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kayyonni, Knnunni 
Marathi:Bhangra, Bhringiraja, Maka 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Bhangra 
Tamil   :Karisalankanni, Karisalanganni, Karisalai 
Telugu  :Guntakalagara, Guntagalagara 
Urdu    :Bhangra 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Well developed, a number of secondary branches arise from main root, upto about  
7 mm in dia., cylindrical, greyish. 
Stem - Herbaceous, branched, occasionally rooting at nodes, cylindrical or flat, rough  
due to oppressed white hairs, node distinct, greenish, occasionally brownish. 
Leaf  - Opposite, sessile to subsessile, 2.2 - 8.5 cm long, 1.2 - 2.3 cm wide, usually  
oblong, lanceolate, sub-entire, sub-acute or acute, strigose with appressed hairs on both  
surfaces. 
Flower - Solitary or 2, together on unequal axillary peduncles; involucral bracts about 8,  
ovate, obtuse or acute, herbaceous, strigose with oppressed hairs; ray flowers ligulate,  
ligule small, spreading, scarcely as long as bracts, not toothed, white; disc flowers  
21tubular, corolla often 4 toothed; pappus absent, except occasionally very minute teeth on  
the top of achene; stamen 5, filaments epipetalous, free, anthers united into a tube with  
base obtuse; pistil bicarpellary; ovary inferior, unilocular with one basal ovule. 
Fruit - Achenial cypsella, one seeded, cuneate, with a narrow wing, covered with warty  
excrescences, brown. 
Seed - 0.2 - 0.25 cm long, 0.1 cm wide, dark brown, hairy and non endospermic. 
b) Microscopic 
Root - Mature root shows poorly developed cork, consisting of 3-5 rows of thin-walled,  
tangentially elongated cells; secondary cortex consists of outer one or two rows of  
tangentially  elongated or rounded cells with air cavities, inner secondary cortex of  
tangentially elongated to irregular shaped, parenchymatous cells with conspicuous air  
cavities; stone cells found scattered in secondary cortex and cork, in singles or in groups  
of various shape and size; pericyclic fibres in tangentially arranged bands of many cells  
or in singles; secondary phloem consists of sieve elements including phloem fibres  
traversed  by  multiseriate  phloem  rays;  phloem  rays  broader  towards  periphery,  
consisting of rounded  cells; xylem composed  of vessels, fibre tracheids, fibres and  
xylem  parenchyma,  traversed  by  xylem  rays;  vessels  numerous,  found  scattered  
throughout  wood,  in  macerated  preparation  vessels  small,  drum-shaped,  cylindrical  
elongated  with  pitted  walls  and  perforations,  simple,  rarely  slightly  oblique;  fibre  
tracheids, pitted, with very pointed tips, xylem fibres long with pointed tapering ends  
and short lumen, a few fibres show peg-like outgrowths towards the tapering ends;  
xylem parenchyma sparse usually squarish to rectangular having simple pits on their  
walls, xylem ray distinct, run straight in tangential section, generally 5-32 cells in height  
and 3-5 cells in width although very rarely uniseriate and biseriate rays also found, ray  
cells pitted. 
Leaf-
Petiole  - shows single layered upper and lower epidermis consisting of tubular cells,  
covered with striated cuticle; trichomes of two types, non-glandular, uniseriate, 1-5  
celled,  warty,  and  with  pointed  apical  cell;  epidermis  followed  by  wide  cortex,  
consisting of 2-5 layered collenchyma on both, upper arid lower side with distinct  
angular thickening; parenchyma 4-6 layered on upper side and 5-8 layered on lower side  
consisting  of  isodiametric, thin-walled  cells with  intercellular  spaces; five vascular  
bundles central one largest while four others small flanking to either side of central  
bundle, consists of xylem on dorsal side and phloem on ventral side; xylem vessels  
arranged in radial rows traversed by xylem rays. 
Midrib  - cut at basal region shows both upper and lower single layered epidermis,  
externally  covered  with  cuticle,  a  few  epidermal  cells  elongate  outwards  to  form  
uniseriate  hairs;  epidermis  followed  by  cortex,  consisting  of  3-5  layered  
22collenehymatous cells on both sides; section cut at middle region shows 3-4 layered  
collenchymatous cells on dorsal and 1-3 layered on ventral side, while the section cut at  
apical region, shows 2 layered collenchymatous cells on both sides, similarly transverse  
section cut at a basal, middle and apical regions shows 4-6 layered parenchymatous cells  
on dorsal side and 6-9 layered parenchyma on ventral side, in section cut at basal region  
4-6 layered parenchyma on both the sides in the middle region with thin-walled cells and  
intercellular spaces, 2-3 layered parenchymatous cells on both side in the apical region;  
in the basal region section shows vascular bundle similar to that of petiole while in the  
section cut at middle and apical region section shows 4 smaller bundles shifting towards  
lamina. 
Lamina - shows a dorsi ventral structure, epidermis single layered, externally covered  
with cuticle, followed by single layered palisade parenchyma containing chlorophyll  
contents; spongy parenchyma irregularly arranged with distinct intercellular spaces and  
filled with chlorophyll contents; mesophyll traversed by number of veins; anisocytic and  
anomocytic stomata present on both surface, more abundant on lower surfaces; stomatal  
index 20.0-22.5 on upper and 23.5 -26.0 on lower surface; palisade ratio 3.8 -4.5; hairs  
stiff,  pointed,  wide  at  the  base,  about  3  celled,  uniseriate,  middle  cells  longest,  
uppermost generally not exceeding the basal cell in length, septa thick-walled. 
Stem - Mature stem shows single layered epidermis, externally covered with cuticle, a  
few epidermal cells elongate to form characteristic non-glandular trichomes, the cork  
where  formed,  poorly  developed  consistsing  of  rectangular  cells;  secondary  cortex  
composed of large, rounded or irregular shaped parenchymatous cells having wide air  
spaces; endodermis single layered consists of tangentially elongated cells; pericyclic  
fibres distinct, arranged in tangential strands; vascular bundles in a ring, collateral,  
endarch, of varying sizes traversed by medullary rays; phloem a narrow strip composed  
of sieve elements and phloem parenchyma; xylem consists of large number of vessels,  
xylem fibres and xylem parenchyma; xylem vessels appear evenly distributed throughout  
the xylem; in macerated preparation vessels barrel-shaped, some elongated with simple  
perforations, pitted with spiral thickening; xylem fibres with wide lumen, pointed tips  
and pitted walls, a few often bifurcate and a few other large, peg-like outgrowth; xylem  
parenchyma rectangular with pitted thickening; xylem rays triseriate to pentaseriate,  
normally biseriate and uniseriate, 8-15 cells in height and 3-5 cells in width; centre  
occupied by a wide pith consisting of isodiametric cells of parenchyma. 
Powder - Dark green; shows vessels in large groups or single broken pieces with pitted  
walls, numerous fibres entire or in pieces, trichomes entire or in pieces, warty, a few  
attached with epidermal and subsidiary cells, anomocytic and anisocytic stomata. 
23IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  2    per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  22   per cent, Appendix       2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than  11    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5   per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than   15     per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids, Ecliptine and Nicotine.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Balya,  Kaphahara,  V¡tahara,  Ëmahara,  Ras¡yana,  Ke¿ya,  Tvacya,  
Dantya, CakÀusya, ViÀahara. 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - Bh¤´g¡malak¡di Taila, Bh¤´gar¡ja Taila, N¢l¢ Bh¤
´g¡di Taila, Bh¤´agar¡j¡sava, Tekar¡ja marica. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áotha, áv¡sa, K¡sa, P¡¸·u, Yak¤droga, K¤miroga, áirah á£la, H
¤droga. 
DOSE  - 3 - 6 ml of the drug in juice form. 
  12 - 36 g. of the drug in powder form for decoction.  
   
  
2411. Brahmi (W.P.)  
BRËHMÌ (Whole Plant) 
Br¡hm¢ consists of dried whole plant of  Bacopa monnieri  (Linn.) Wettst., Syn.  
Herpestis monnieria  (LiM.) H.B.& K. (Fam. Scrophulariaceae); a glabrous, succulent,  
small, prostrate or creeping annual herb, found throughout India in wet and damp places. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Sarasvat¢, Kapotava´ka 
Assamese:Brahmi 
Bengali:-- 
English:Thyme Leaved Gratiola 
Gujrati  :Neerbrahmi, Bamanevari 
Hindi    :Manduka Parni 
Kannada:Nirubrahmi, Valabrahmi, Ondelaga, Mandukaparni 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Bhahmi 
Marathi:Jalnam, Brahmi, Birami 
Oriya   :Brahmi 
Punjabi:Brahmibuti 
Tamil   :Nirabrahmi, Brahmi vazhukkai 
Telugu  :Sambarenu, Sambrani 
Urdu    :Brahmi 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Thin, wiry, small, branched creamish-yellow. 
Stem - Thin, green or purplish green, about 1-2 mm thick, soft, nodes and internodes  
prominent, glabrous; taste, slightly bitter. 
Leaf - Simple, opposite, decussate, green, sessile, 1-2 cm long, obovate-oblong; taste,  
slightly bitter. 
Flower - Small, axillary and solitary, pedicels 6-30 mm long, bracteoles shorter than  
pedicels. 
Fruit - Capsules upto 5 mm long, ovoid and glabrous. 
 
25b) Microscopic 
Root -  Shows  a  single  layer  of  epidermis,  cortex  having  large  air  cavities;  
endodermis single layered; pericycle not distinct; stele consists of a thin layer of phloem  
with a few sieve elements and isolated material from xylem shows vessels with reticulate  
thickenings. 
Stem - Shows single layer of epidermis followed by a wide cortex of thin-walled cells  
with very large intercellular spaces; endodermis single layered; pericycle 3 consisting of  
1-2 layers; vascular ring continuous, composed of a narrow zone of phloem towards pe -
riphery and a wide ring of xylem towards centre; centre occupied by a small pith with  
distinct intercellular spaces; starch grains simple, round to oval, present in a few cells of  
cortex and endodermis, measuring 4-14  µ  in dia., and 8.0-14.0 x 2.5-9.0  µ in dia. 
respectively. 
Leaf -Shows a single layer of upper and lower epidermis covered with thin cuticle; glan -
dular hairs sessile, subsidiary cells present on both surfaces; a few prismatic crystals of  
calcium oxalate occasionally found distributed in mesophyll cells; mesophyll traversed  
by small veins surrounded by bundle sheath; no distinct midrib present. 
Powder - Yellowish-brown; shows xylem vessels with reticulate thickening, glandular  
hairs, simple, round and oval starch grains, measuring 4-14  µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than 2     per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than 18    per cent, Appendix       2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than  6    per cent, Appendix       2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than    6    per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    15    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Sara 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Kaphahara, Medhya, Ras¡yana, Svarya, V¡tahara, ViÀahara, ËyuÀya,  
Matiprada, Praj¡sth¡pana, Mohahara 
 
26IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - S¡rasvat¡riÀ¶a, Br¡hm¢ Gh¤ta, Ratnagiri Rasa, Br¡hm¢  
Va¶¢, S¡rasvata C£r¸a, Sm¤tis¡gara Rasa. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  KuÀ¶ha, Jvara, áopha, P¡¸·u, Prameha, M¡nasavik¡ra 
DOSE  - 1-3 g in powder form.  
   
  
2712. Brihati (Rt.)  
BÎHATÌ (Root) 
B¤hat¢ consists of dried root of Solanum indicum Linn. (Fam. Solanaceae); a very  
prickly, much branched perennial under shrub, upto 1.8 m high, mostly found throughout  
warmer parts of the country upto an elevation of 1500 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:áanhika 
Assamese:Tilabhakuri 
Bengali:Byakud 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Umimuyaringani, Ubhibharingani, Ubhibhuyaringa 
Hindi    :Vanabharata, Badikateri 
Kannada:Kirugullia, Heggulla, Gulla 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Cheru Vazhuthina, Putirichunda 
Marathi:Dorli, Chichuriti, Dorale 
Oriya   :Dengabheji 
Punjabi:Kandiarivaddi 
Tamil   :Chiru vazhuthalai, Papparamulli, Mullamkatti 
Telugu  :Tella Mulaka 
Urdu    :Kateli 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root well developed, long, ribbed, woody, cylindrical, pale yellowish-brown,  
1-2.5 cm in dia., a number of secondary roots and their branches present, surface rough  
due to presence of longitudinal striations and root scars, fracture, short and splintery; no  
distinct odour and taste.
b) Microscopic 
Root - Shows thin cork composed of 5 - 15 layers of thin-walled, tangentially elongated,  
rectangular  cells filled with yellowish-brown content; cork cambium single layered;  
secondary  cortex  composed  of  5  -  9  layers  of  thin-walled,  oval  and  tangentially  
elongated cells; stone cells present in singles or in groups of 2-5 or more in this region;  
secondary phloem composed of sieve elements, parenchyma and stone cells, traversed by  
phloem rays; phloem parenchyma much abundant, thin-walled; stone cells present in  
outer phloem region in singles or in groups of 2-5, varying greatly in shape and size;  
phloem rays 1-3 cells wide, isodiametric to slightly radially elongated in inner phloem  
28region and radially elongated in outer phloem region, occasionally stone cells also found  
in medullary rays; wood occupies bulk of root and composed of vessels, tracheids, fibres  
and xylem parenchyma, traversed by xylem rays, all elements being lignified, vessels  
occur singly or in groups of 2-5 with simple pits; xylem fibres moderately thick-walled  
with simple pits and pointed ends found in adundance; xylem parenchyma have simple  
pits or reticulate thickening; xylem rays uni to biseriate, thick-walled, cells radially  
elongated and pitted, microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate as sandy masses and  
simple starch grains present in some cells of secondary cortex, phloem and medullary  
rays; simple and rounded to oval starch grains, measuring 5.5 -11.6 µ in diameter. 
Powder - Cream coloured; shows groups of thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, aseptate  
fibres, vessels with simple pits, oval to elongated stone cells and simple, rounded to oval  
starch grains, measuring 5.5 - 11.6 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than 2    per cent, Appendix        2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than 6.5     per cent, Appendix     2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than 1    per cent, Appendix        2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than   3     per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than   4     per cent, Appendix     2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Steroidal Alkaloids and Steroids 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, H¤dya, Kaphahara, P¡cana, V¡tahara, Gr¡h¢ 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Da¿am£l¡riÀ¶a., Da¿am£la Gh¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - á£la, áv¡sa, H¤droga, Jvara, Agnim¡dya. 
DOSE  - 10-20 g. of the drug for decoction. 
   
  
2913. Chavya (St.)  
CAVYA (Stem) 
Cavya consists of dried stem of Piper retrofractum Vahl. Syn. P. chaba Hunter non  
Blume., P. officinarum DC. (Fam. Piperaceae); a glabrous, fleshy climber, cultivated mainly  
in Southern India. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Cavika 
Assamese:Chepaan 
Bengali:Chei 
English:Cubeb 
Gujrati  :Chavka, Chavaka 
Hindi    :Chavya 
Kannada:Kadumenasinaballi, Chavya 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kattumulaku, Kattumulakunveru 
Marathi:Chavaka 
Oriya   :Chainkath 
Punjabi:Chabak 
Tamil   :Chavyam, Chevuyam 
Telugu  :Chevyamu 
Urdu    :Peepal Chab, Kababah 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug consists of dried cut pieces of stem of variable length and usually 0.5-2.0  
cm in width, cylindrical and somewhat twisted, greyish-brown, surface smooth with a  
few longitudinal wrinkles, nodes and internodes distinct, fracture, short; odour, peppery;  
taste, acrid.
b) Microscopic 
Stem - Shows a thin cork consisting of 3-4 layers of rectangular, brownish cells; cork  
cambium  not  distinct;  secondary  cortex  a wide  zone,  consisting  of  round,  oval  to  
rectangular,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells  with  prominent  intercellular  spaces;  
plenty  of  simple  starch  granules  present;  endodermis  single  layered;  stelar  region  
composed of five wedge-shaped vascular bundles alternating with wide medullary rays;  
phloem  lies  towards  outer  side  and  composed  of  sieve  elements,  parenchyma  and  
phloem fibres occurring singly or in groups; xylem lies towards centre and composed of  
vessels, tracheid, fibres and xylem parenchyma; isolated vessels barrel-shaped with  
30pitted and reticulate thickenings; fibres needle and spindle-shaped, medullary rays multi  
seriate, cells thin walled, filled with simple, round to oval, starch grains, measuring 3 -  
14 µ in diameter. 
Powder - Greyish-brown; shows fragments of vessels, fibres and simple, round to oval  
starch grains, measuring 3-14 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  2  per cent, Appendix         2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  10    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than  1.5    per cent, Appendix     2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than    3    per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    6     per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Alkaloids, Glycosides and Steroids. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Bhedana, D¢pana, Kaphahara, P¡cana, Recana, V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Pr¡¸ad¡ Gu¶ik¡, Candr¡m¤ta Rasa. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Ar¿a, Ën¡ha, Gulma, Krimi, Udara Roga, Pl¢h¡ Roga, á£lal 
DOSE  - 1-2 g. of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
3114. Dadima (Sd.)  
DËÚIMA (Seed) 
D¡·ima consists of dried seed of Punica granatum Linn. (Fam. Punicaceae); a large  
deciduous shrub or a small tree, found growing wild in the warm valley, outer hills of  
Himalayas between 900- 1800 m and cultivated in many parts of the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:D¡·im¡cchada, LohitapuÀpa, Dantab¢ja 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Ddima 
English:Pomegranate 
Gujrati  :Dadama 
Hindi    :Anar 
Kannada:Dalimba 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Matalam 
Marathi:Dadimba 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Anar 
Tamil   :Madalai, Maadalai. Madalam 
Telugu  :Danimma 
Urdu    :Anar, Rumman 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds brown, angular, wedge-shaped, 0.5-0.6 cm long, 0.1-0.2 cm wide; taste,  
sweetish-sour. 
b) Microscopic 
Seed - Shows testa consisting of thin-walled, parenchymatous cells followed by stony  
tegmen consisting of lignified, round, oval, triangular  and rectangular, thick-walled  
stone cells having narrow and wide lumen; beneath this, reddish-brown pigmented layer  
present; endosperm  absent; cotyledons coiled, consisting  of oval to polygonal, thin  
walled, parenchymatous cells, containing a few oil globules; starch grains present in  
testa, round to oval, simple, measuring 3-17 µ in diameter. 
Powder - Reddish-brown; shows stone cells, oil globules, and a few simple round to  
oval starch grains measuring 3-17 µ in diameter.
32IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  2    per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  4    per cent, Appendix       2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than  0.5    per cent, Appendix     2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than   20     per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than   35     per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  alcoholic  extract  of  the  drug  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  
Chloroform:Ethylacetate : Formic acid (5:4:1) v/v three spots at Rf. 0.62, 0.87 (both grey)  
and 0.97 (pink) are seen in visible light. Under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones are  
visible at Rf. 0.12 (sky blue), 0.45 (sky blue), 0.62 (blue) & 0.87 (blue). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.62, 0.87 & 0.97 (all yellow). On spraying with  
5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at 110 ˚ 
C three spots appear at Rf. 0.62, 0.87 (both violet) & 0.97 (greyish blue). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Sugars, Vitamin C, Sitosterol, Ursolic acid, Protein, Fat and Mineral  
matters,  Nicotinic  acid,  Pectin,  Riboflavin,  Thiamine,  Delphinidin  diglycoside,  Aspartic,  
Citric, Ellagic, Gallic and Malic acids, Glutamine, Isoquercetin, Estrone and Punicic acid.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Madura Amla : Madhura, Amla 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha, Madura Amla : Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a, Madura Amla : -- 
Vipaka :Madhura, Madura Amla : -- 
Karma :áukrala,  Gr¡h¢,  H¤dya,  Ka¸¶hya,  Medhya,  Pittahara,  V¡tahara,  
Kaphahar¡, Tarpa¸a, Mukhagandhahara, Balya. 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - D¡·im¡À¶aka C£r¸a, D¡·ima Gh¤ta, D¡dhika Gh¤ta,  
Bh¡Àkara Lava¸a, áukra M¡trka Va¶¢. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - D¡ha, T¤À¸¡, Jvara 
DOSE  - 5 to 10 g. of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
3315. Daruharidra (St.)  
DËRUHARIDRË (Stem) 
 D¡ruharidr¡ consists of dried stem of Berberis aristata DC. (Fam. Berberidaceae);  
an erect, spinous, deciduous shrub, usually 1.8-3.6 m in height found in the Himalayan  
ranges at an elevation of   1000-3000 m, and in the Nilgiri hills in South India. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Katamkateri, D¡rvi 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Daruharidra 
English:Indian Berberry 
Gujrati  :Daruharidra, Daruhuladur 
Hindi    :Daruhaldi, Darhald 
Kannada:Maradarishana, Maradarishina, Daruhaladi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Maramannal, Maramanjal 
Marathi:Daruhalad 
Oriya   :Daruharidra, Daruhalidi 
Punjabi:Sumalu 
Tamil   :Gangeti, Varatiu manjal 
Telugu  :Manupasupu 
Urdu    :Darhald 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug available in pieces of variable length and thickness, bark about 0.4 - 0.8 cm  
thick, pale yellowish-brown, soft, closely and rather deeply furrowed, rough, brittle,  
xylem portion yellow, more or less hard, radiate with xylem rays, pith mostly absent,  
when present small, yellowish-brown when dried, fracture short in bark region, splintery  
in xylem; taste, bitter.
b) Microscopic 
Stem -Shows rhytidoma with cork consisting of 3-45 rectangular and squarish, yellow  
coloured, thin-walled cells, arranged radially; sieve elements irregular in shape, thin  
walled, a few cells containing yellowish-brown contents; phloem fibres arranged in  
tangential rows, consisting of 1-4 cells, each fibre short thick-walled, spindle-shaped,  
lignified having wide lumen; half inner portion of rhytidoma traversed by secondary  
phloem rays; phloem rays run obliquely consisting of radially elongated parenchymatous  
cells, almost all phloem ray cells having single prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, a  
34few cells of rhytidoma also contain prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; stone cells also  
found scattered in phloem ray cells in groups, rarely single, mostly elongated, a few  
rounded, arranged radially, some of which contain a single prism of calcium oxalate  
crystals; secondary phloem, a broad zone, consisting of sieve elements and phloem  
fibres, traversed by multi seriate phloem rays; sieve elements arranged in tangential  
bands and tangentially compressed cells alternating with single to five rows of phloem  
fibres, phloem fibres short, lignified, thick-walled having pointed ends; secondary xylem  
broad consisting of xylem vessels, tracheids, xylem fibres and traversed by multi seriate  
xylem rays; xylem vessels numerous, small to medium sized, distributed throughout  
xylem  region  in  groups  or  in  singles,  groups  of  vessels  usually  arranged  radially;  
isolated vessels cylindrical with rounded or projected at one or both ends with spiral  
thickening; xylem fibres numerous, lignified, large, thick-walled with wide lumen, and  
pointed  tips;  xylem  rays  quite  distinct,  straight,  multiseriate,  consisting  of  radially  
arranged rectangular cells, each ray 30-53 cells high, 8-12 cells wide, a few ray cells  
containing brown contents. 
Powder - Yellow; shows mostly fragments of cork cells, sieve elements, yellow coloured  
phloem fibres entire or in pieces, stone cells in singles or in groups, numerous prismatic  
crystals  of  calcium  oxalate,  xylem  vessels  having  spiral  thickening,  thick-walled,  
lignified xylem fibres and ray cells. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  2    per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   14   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   5   per cent, Appendix       2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    8    per cent, Appendix     2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :-- 
Karma :Stanya áodhana, Stanya DoÀahara, DoÀa P¡cana 
 
35IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Bh¤´gar¡ja  Taila,  A¿vagandh¡dyariÀ¶a,  Khadir¡di  
Gu¶ika, Khadir¡riÀ¶a, J¡ty¡di Taila, Triphal¡ Gh¤ta.  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - Ka¸·u, Medoroga, Mukharoga, Vra¸a, Ëm¡tis¡ra, Urustambha,  
Kapharoga, Kar¸aroga, Netraroga, Meha. 
DOSE  - 5-10 ml of the drug in Kvatha form.  
   
  
3616. Dronapushpi (W.P.)  
DROÛAPUâPÌ  (Whole Plant) 
Dro¸apuÀp¢ consists of dried whole plant of  Leucas cephalotes Spreng .  (Fam. 
Lamiaceae), an annual, erect, scaberulous, stout herb, about 0.6-0.9 m in high, found on  
the Himalayas at an altitude of 600-1800 m and on waste lands throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Katumba 
Assamese:Dronaphool 
Bengali:Bholghasiya 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Kubo 
Hindi    :Guma 
Kannada:Tumbe 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Tumba 
Marathi:Tumba 
Oriya   :Gaisha 
Punjabi:Gomobati, Gumma, Mal-bheda 
Tamil   :Tumbai 
Telugu  :Tummi 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root  -  Cylindrical,  zig-zag,  smooth,  long  with  numerous  wiry,  fine  rootlets,  size  
variable, fracture, fibrous; taste, characteristic. 
Stem  - Light greenish-yellow, surface rough, hairy, quadrangular with four prominent  
furrows, upto 4 mm thick, nodes and internodes distinct; taste, slightly bitter. 
Leaf  -  Yellowish-green,  3-9  cm  long,  1-2.5  cm  wide,  ovate  or  ovate-  lanceolate,  
subacute, more or less pubescent, crenate, serrate; taste, pungent. 
Inflorescence  -  Sessile,  white,  crowded  in  dense,  globose,  about  2-3.5  cm  across,  
surrounded by numerous foliaceous bracts, thin, lanceolate, acute, ciliate, 1.2-1.5 cm  
long and 0.3-0.35 cm wide; calyx, tubular, slightly curved, 1-2.25 cm long, glabrous in  
lower part, hairy on upper part, 10 dentate with a villous throat; corolla, white, 1.7-2 cm  
37long, bilipped, upper lip about 4 mm long, wooly, lower lip nearly twice as long as upper  
one; lateral lobes small. 
Fruit - Schizocarpic carcerule, nutlets 3 mm smooth, brown. 
Seed - 0.3 cm long and 0.1 cm wide, oblong, trigonous, smooth, dark brown. 
b) Microscopic 
Root - Shows a single layered epidermis composed of rectangular, thin-walled cells;  
secondary cortex consists of thin-walled,tangentially elongated, parenchymatous cells;  
secondary phloem consists of sieve elements and phloem parenchyma; secondary xylem  
consists of vessels, tracheids, fibres and xylem parenchyma; vessels long with spurs,  
vessels and tracheids have simple pits, xylem fibres much elongated with pointed ends  
and have moderately thick walls, some having simple pits; medullary rays 1-2 seriate,  
upto 8 cells high.
Stem - Shows squarish outline with four ridges and furrows, consists of a single layered  
epidermis, composed of oval to rectangular, thin-walled cells having a number of uni to  
tricellular trichomes; secondary cortex 5-9 layered, consisting of 3-5 layers of circular,  
oval or irregular collenchymatous cells at the ridge and 2-4 layers of thin-walled,  
tangentially elongated, parenchymatous cells; endoderm is single layered, consisting of  
barrel  shaped,  thin-walled  cells;  pericycle  single  layered  of  thin-walled  cells  
comparatively smaller than the cells of endodermis, a few pericyclic cells converted  
into pericyclic fibres; phloem very narrow consisting of usual elements; xylem consists  
of vessels, tracheids, fibres and large amount of xylem parenchyma; vessels mostly  
cylindrical with simple pits and spiral thickening; tracheids and xylem parenchyma  
have simple pits on their walls; pith wide consisting of circular to oval, thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells. 
Leaf- 
Petiole  - shows a single layered epidermis, uni to tricellular trichomes with pointed  
ends, cortex consisting of single layered, round to angular collenchyma; parenchyma  
consists of thin-walled cells containing prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, vascular  
bundles 4, 2 smaller located towards each comer and 2 larger in centre. 
Midrib - shows epidermis on either side with uni to tricellular trichomes, followed by  
1-2  layers  collenchyma  towards  lower  surface,  3-4  layers  towards  upper  surface,  
followed  by  round  to  oval  parenchyma, 4  -  7 layered;vascular  bundle  arc-shaped,  
present in centre. 
Lamina - shows epidermis on either side with uni to tricellular trichomes rarely on upper  
surface; palisade single layered; spongy parenchyma 3-5 layered, irregular, thin-walled  
38cells; a few veins present in this region; stomata diacytic, present on both surfaces;  
stomatal index 16.6-40.5 on lower surface, 16.6-30.7 on upper surface; palisade ratio  
7-9.
Powder - Dull yellow; shows groups of round to polygonal parenchymatous cells, pitted  
and spiral vessels, aseptate fibres, uni to tricellular trichomes and diacytic stomata.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  2    per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  17    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than  6   per cent, Appendix        2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    14    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloid, Glycoside, β -Sitosterol and Flavonoid. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Lava¸a, Ka¶u 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittakara, V¡takara, Bhedani, Rucya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Pl¢h¡ri Va¶ik¡, Gorocan¡di Va¶¢. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áotha, K¡sa, K¡mal¡, Tamaka áv¡sa, Agnim¡ndya, ViÀamajvara 
DOSE  - 1-3 g of the drug in powder form.5-10 ml of the drug in juice form. 
   
  
3917. Ervaru (Sd.)  
ERVËRU (Seed) 
Erv¡ru consists of seeds of Cucumis melo var. utilissimus Duthie & Fuller Syn. C. 
utilissimus Roxb. (Fam. Cucurbitaceae), an annual creeping herb, cultivated in many parts  
of the country, especially in upper India and particularly in Uttar Pradesh and Punjab. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Bahukanda, B¤hatphala, Hastipani. Hastipani, Karka¶¢. 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Kakur, Karikuda 
English:Snake Cucumber 
Gujrati  :Kakadi 
Hindi    :Karkri, Kakadi 
Kannada:Saute 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kamkadi, Vellarika 
Marathi:Kakadi, Valnka 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Kakri 
Tamil   :Kakkarikkay, Vellarikkai 
Telugu  :Dosakaya 
Urdu    :Kakari 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seed compressed,  more or  less ellipsoid,  0.7-10 cm long,  0.3-0.4  cm  wide,  
surface smooth, glossy, creamish-yellow; taste, sweetish oily. 
b) Microscopic 
Seed -Shows seed coat consisting of a layer of round to oval stone cells, lignified with  
distinct lumen and striations, followed by a narrow zone of endosperm consisting of  
cellulosic,  thin-walled,  rounded  and  tangentially  elongated,  parenchymatous  cells,  
containing a few oil globules and aleurone grains; cotyledons two, straight, consisting  
of single layered epidermal cells, covered with thick cuticle, mesophyll cells thin-
walled,  radially  elongated  to  squarish,  parenchymatous,  containing  numerous  oil  
globules and aleurone grains. 
Powder _ Creamish-yellow and oily; shows stone cells, mesophyll cells and numerous  
oil globules and aleurone grains.
40IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  1    per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  4    per cent, Appendix       2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than  0.5   per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than    10    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    5    per cent, Appendix     2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene :  
Ethylacetate (90:10) shows one fluorescent zone at Rf.0.91 (blue) under U.V. (366 mm).  
On exposure to Iodine vapour ten spots appear at Rf. 0.19, 0.26, 0.35, 0.51, 0.58, 0.64,  
0.77,0.83,0.91 and 0.97 (all yellow) .On spraying with 5% Methanolic Phosphomolybdic  
acid reagent and on heating the plate for fifteen minutes at 105 °C ten spots appear at Rf.  
0.19, 0.26, 0.35, 0.51, 0.58, 0.64, 0.77, 0.83, 0.91 and 0.97 (all grey). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Oil & Sugars.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Bhedi,  D¢pana,  Kaphakara,  Pittahara,  Rucya,  V¡takara,  
RaktadoÀakara, G¤¡h¢ 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - D¡dhika Gh¤ta. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - D¡ha, Gulma, Jvara, Raktapitta, T¤À¸¡, A¿mar¢, M£trak¤cchra 
DOSE  - 3-6 g. of seeds. 
   
  
4118. Gajapippali (Fr.)  
GAJAPIPPALÌ (Fruit) 
Gajapippal¢ consists of dried, transversely cut pieces of mature female spadix of  
Scindapsus officinalis Schoott . (Fam. Araceae); a large epiphytic climber, found all along  
the sub-Himalayan  tract between  an altitude of  330-1000  m in  West Bengal,  Orissa,  
Andhra Pradesh and the Andaman Islands. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Gajak¤À¸a, Hastipipal¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Gajapeepal 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Motopeepar 
Hindi    :Gajapeepal 
Kannada:Adkebeeluvalli 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Attipali 
Marathi:Gajapipalee 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Gajapeepal 
Tamil   :Anaitippalee 
Telugu  :Enugopippal 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit - Occurs in transversely cut circular pieces of about 2.0-3.0 cm in diameter and  
2.0-3.5  cm  thick,  brownish-grey,  rough  and  scaly,  cut  surface  has  a  central  core,  
surrounded by fruits enclosing the seed covered partly by aril; odour and taste not  
distinct. 
Seed - Kidney-shaped, 0.3-0.4 cm wide, 0.4-0.6 cm long, smooth, shiny, greyish-brown  
with a dent, odour and taste not disticnt.
 
b) Microscopic 
Fruit - Shows more or less loosely arranged, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells having  
more or less isodiametric cells filled with brown content and numerous acicular crystals  
of calcium oxalate. 
42Seed  - Shows a single layered, oval to polygonal, thin-walled testa followed by 2-3  
layered, thick-walled, oval to polygonal, non-lignified, sclereid-like cells having wide  
lumen and concentric striations; 2-4 layered, oval to polygonal, thick-walled, lignified  
stone cells having very narrow lumen, pitted and with concentric striations; thin-walled,  
irregular parenchymatous cells containing oil globules and aleurone grains. 
Powder - Dark brown; shows lignified, oval to polygonal stone cells having lumen and  
striations; numerous needle-like acicular crystals of calcium oxalate, measuring 120-130  
µ  in length and oil globules. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
Foreign matter                          Not more than 2    per cent, Appendix        2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  14    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5   per cent, Appendix     2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3   per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     11   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform :  
Methanol (1:1) shows two spots at Rf. 0.65 and 0.73 (both light yellow) in visible light  
Under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.27, 0.65, 0.73 and 0.93 (all blue) are  
visible. On exposure to Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.20, 0.27, 0.65, 0.73 and  
0.93 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the  
plate for ten minutes at 1l0 °C. Three spots appear at Rf. 0.65, 0.73 (both light brown) and  
0.93 (brown). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Glucosides viz. Scindapsin A & Scindapsin B, Sugars & Fixed Oil.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Ka¸¶hya, Kaphahara, V¡tahara, Agnivardhaka, Malavi¿oÀana,  
Stanya, Va¤¸ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - áiv¡gutik¡, Punarnav¡sava,  Mah¡yogar¡ja Guggulu,  
Pras¡ri¸i Taila, Candraprabh¡ va¶i. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Atis¡ra, áv¡sa, K¤miroga, Ka¸ha Roga. 
DOSE  -  2-3 g. in extract (Phant) form.  
4319. Gambhari (Fr.) 
GAMBHARI (Fruit)  
Gambhari consists of dried fruit of Gmelina arborea Roxb. (Fam. Verbenaceae), an  
unarmed tree, found scattered in deciduous forests throughout the greater part of the  
country upto an altitude of 500 m, planted in gardens and also as an avenue tree. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:K¡¿mar¢, K¡¿marya, P¢takarohi¸¢, Sr¢par¸¢, Bhadrapar¸¢ 
Assamese:Gomari 
Bengali:Gamargachha, Gambar 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Seevan 
Hindi    :Gambhari 
Kannada:Seevani, Shivani, Hannu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kumbil, Kumizhu 
Marathi:Sivan 
Oriya   :Gambhari, Bhodroparnni 
Punjabi:Khambhari 
Tamil   :Perunkurmizh, Komizhpazham 
Telugu  :Gumaditeku 
Urdu    :Gambhari 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit  - A drupe, ovoid, crinkled, black, 1.5-2.0 cm long, sometimes with portion of  
attached pedicel, two seeded, sometimes one seeded; taste, sweetish sour. 
Seed - Seed ovate, 0.5-1 cm long, 0.4-0.6 cm wide, light yellow, surface smooth, seed  
coat thin, papery; taste, oily. 
b) Microscopic 
Fruit  - Shows pericarp differentiated into single layered epicarp, multilayered, fleshy  
mesocarp, hard and stony endocarp: epicarp consisting of single layered, thin-walled  
cells; mesocarp a wide zone consisting of isodiametric, thin-walled, parenchymatous  
cells; endocarp consisting of multilayered sclerenchymatous cells. 
Seed - Shows outer integument consisting of 3-5 rows of crushed, parenchymatous cells  
followed  by  inner  integument  consisting  of  2-3  rows  of  thin-walled,  tangentially  
elongated,  parenchymatous  cells;  cotyledons  consisting  of  single  layered,  radially  
44elongated  epidermal cells; mesophyll  consisting  of thin-walled cells, filled with oil  
globules and aleurone grains. 
Powder - Blackish-brown; shows stone cells, oil globules and aleurone grains. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  1    per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6   per cent, Appendix       2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.4  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     8   per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than      25  per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform :  
Methanol (4 : 1) shows one spot at Rf. 0.98 (yellow) in visible light. Under U.V. (366 nm)  
five fluorescent zones appear at Rf. 0.03, 0.12, 0.22, 0.94 and 0.98 (all blue). On exposure  
to Iodine vapour eight spots appear at Rf. 0.03, 0.08, 0.18, 0.26, 0.42, 0.52, 0.93 and 0.98  
(all yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent followed by 5% Ethanolic -Sulphuric  
acid reagent one spot appears at Rf. 0.98 (orange). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Butyric acid, Tartaric acid, Alkaloid, Resin and Saccharine. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, Sara, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :áukrala,  H¤dya,  Ke¿ya,  Medhya,  Pittahara,  Ras¡yana,  V¡tahara,  B
¤Æha¸a 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Arvind¡sava, Dr¡kÀ¡di Kv¡tha C£rna. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - D¡ha, H¤droga., KÀata, KÀaya, M£trak¤cchra, T¤À¸¡, Rakta Pitta 
DOSE  - 1-3 g. of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
4520. Gangeru (St.Bk.)  
GË×GERU (Stem bark) 
G¡´geru consists of dried stem bark of Grewia tenax (Forsk.) Aschers & Schwf.,  
Syn. Grewia populifolia Vahl, (Fam. Tiliaceae), a shrub 0.6-1.0 m high, occurring in North  
Western and central part of the country and in Deccan Peninsula.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:G¡´geruki 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Garakshachakule 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Gangeti 
Hindi    :Gangeran 
Kannada:Turuve 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Oorakam 
Marathi:Gangeti 
Oriya   :Ghodaguli 
Punjabi:Ganger 
Tamil   :Achchu 
Telugu  :Gangeruki 
Urdu    :Gangeran 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs as cut pieces; 1.5-5 cm long, light yellow, channelled, fibrous;  
external surface smooth; fracture, fibrous; taste, mucilaginous. 
b) Microscopic 
Stem Bark -  Shows  a wide cork, consisting  of  12-20 layered, rectangular, radially  
arranged  cells,  a  few  inner  cells  contain  rectangular  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  
secondary  cortex  wide,  consisting  of  tangentially  elongated,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells, a few cortical cells towards cork also contain prismatic crystals of  
calcium oxalate; oval, elliptical, thick-walled, lignified cells with wide lumen and clear  
pit  canals,  moderately  large  in  size,  a  few  stone  cells,  found  scattered  in  groups  
throughout  secondary cortex and in a row towards inner  cortical region;  secondary  
phloem composed of sieve elements, parenchyma and numerous thick-walled, cellulosic  
fibres with wide lumen, blunt tips and moderately long in size, arranged in radial groups,  
traversed by wide phloem rays; a few ray cells contain prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate. 
46Powder - Light yellow and fibrous; under microscope shows phloem fibres in groups or  
singles, stone cells and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  1    per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  9    per cent, Appendix       2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than  1   per cent, Appendix        2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than    6    per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    8    per cent, Appendix     2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  alcoholic  extract  of  the  drug  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Toluene:  
Ethylacetate (90 :10). Two spots are seen at Rf. 0.17, 0.35 (both light yellow) in visible light.  
Under U.V. (366 nm) six fluorescent zones visible at Rf. 0.08 (blue) 0.13 (blue), 0.29 (blue),  
0.35 (dark blue), 0.55 (blue) & 0.64 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour ten spots appear at  
Rf. 0.08, 0.17, 0.27, 0.35, 0.41, 0.48, 0.55, 0.61, 0.68 & 0.88 (all yellow). On spraying with  
Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric  acid reagent seven spots appear at Rf. 0.08 (violet). 0.17 (light  
violet), 0.27 (light violet), 0.35 (violet), 0.48 (violet), 0.68 (light violet) & 0.88 (light violet).  
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sugar, Tannin and Sterols (Triacontan-l-ol, α-amyrin,  β-amyrin etc.). 
 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :TridoÀahara, Sa´gr¡haka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - J¢rak¡di Modaka. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Vra¸a, Pittavik¡ra. 
DOSE  - 2-3 g. of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
4721. Gunja (Rt.)  
GUØJË (Root) 
Guµj¡ consists of dried root of Abrus precatorius Linn. (Fam. Fabaceae); a climber,  
all along Himalayas ascending to 900 m, spreading throughout the plains; flowering in  
August-September, fruits ripen during winter. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Raktik¡, Kakananti 
Assamese:Rati 
Bengali:Kunch, Shonkainh 
English:Jequirity 
Gujrati  :Rati, Chanothee, Chonotee 
Hindi    :Ratti, Ghungchi 
Kannada:Guluganji, gulagunja 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kunni, Cuvanna Kunni 
Marathi:Gunja 
Oriya   :Kainch 
Punjabi:Ratti 
Tamil   :Kunrimani, Kundumani 
Telugu  :Guriginga, Gurivinda 
Urdu    :Ghongchi, Ratti 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root, simple or branched, cylindrical, most often irregularly curved, light brown,  
surface profusely warty and somewhat rough on account of eruptive development of nu -
merous small lenticels; bark thin, slightly corky, soft, exfoliating in small flakes, expos -
ing  internally  both  cream  or  yellowish-white;  internal  bark yellow  with  a leathery  
fibrous texture; wood hard light-yellowish or cream coloured; odourless; taste, feebly  
sweetish, becoming mildly bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Root - Shows thin cork of 3-5 layers of narrow, tangentially elongated cells, some with  
brownish  content;  cork cambium, when  distinct,  composed  of  1-2 cells  wide, thin-
walled, comparatively larger and slightly tangentially elongated cells, followed by 2-4  
rows of spherical ovoid or slightly elongated stone cells with thick, pitted walls, small  
groups  of  4-10  sclerenchymatous  cells,  smaller  than  stone  cells,  present  at  short  
intervals; secondary phloem consists of usual elements traversed by medullary rays  
48diverging  towards  periphery;  parenchyma  thin-walled,  mostly  tangentially  elongated  
with occasional patches of sieve elements in somewhat collapsed form; small groups of  
sclerenchyma, similar to those occurring in cortex are also present; cells in inner phloem  
region appear circular to polyhedral; in older samples phloem elements usually found in  
compressed condition forming obliquely and tangentially arranged irregular patches;  
medullary rays distinct and 1-6 cells wide, thin-walled and rectangular, tangentially  
elongated towards distal end of ray and radially elongated in xylem parts and bast  
region, mostly containing starch grains of various sizes; cambium forms a complete ring  
of  1-2  rows  of  very  narrow  cells  outside  the  wood;  wood  composed  of  narrow  
concentric, annular bands of very thick-walled wood fibres alternating with similar but  
wider zone of thick-walled parenchyma; vessels of varying sizes with thick, pitted walls;  
medullary rays usually uni or biseriate but a few broader rays, 5-10 or more rows of cells  
occasionally present; parenchyma cells of wood and bast filled with simple, rounded to  
oval starch grains measuring 5.5-13.75  µ in diameter. 
Powder -  Greyish-brown;  shows  fragments  of  cork,  stone  cells,  groups  of  
sclerenchymatous cells, numerous xylem fibres, xylem vessels with pitted walls, rounded  
to oval simple starch grains measuring 5.5 -13.75  µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2   per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   9   per cent, Appendix       2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2.5   per cent, Appendix     2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than    4    per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    10    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Glucoside (Glycyrrhizin). 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :á¢ta, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Ke¿ya, Pittahara, V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - N¢l¢ Bh¤´g¡di Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Indralupta, Mukha¿oÀa, áula. 
DOSE  - 1 - 3 g. of the drug in powder form.  
   
4922. Ikshu (St.)  
IKâU (Stem) 
IkÀu  consists of the dried stem of Saccharum officinarum Linn. (Fam. Poaceae), a  
shrub, grown and generally cultivated in all hotter parts and in warm climate throughout  
India. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:IkÀu 
Assamese:Kusiyar 
Bengali:Ganna 
English:Sugarcane 
Gujrati  :Sherdi, Serdi 
Hindi    :Ikha, Ganna 
Kannada:Kabbu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Karumbu, Karimpu 
Marathi:Ush 
Oriya   :Akhu 
Punjabi:Ganna 
Tamil   :Karumbu 
Telugu  :Gheraku 
Urdu    :Ganna, Naishkar 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Stem upto 6 m high, cylindrical, solid, with, distinct node and internode, 3-8-12  
cm long and 2-4 cm in dia; smooth, shining and polished pale or dark green to dark  
yellow, red violet and often striped having a bud at each node; odour, characteristic;  
taste, juicy and sweet. 
b) Microscopic 
Stem -  Shows  a  single  layered  epidermis  consisting  of  thick-walled,  lignified,  
rectangular cells followed by 2-3 layers of sclerenchymatous hypodermis; ground tissue  
consisting of thin-walled, parenchymatous cells having a number of collateral, conjoint,  
closed type of vascular bundles, scattered throughout the ground tissue, more numerous  
and closer towards periphery; each vascular bundle surrounded by a fibrous sheath of  
sclerenchyma, thickness of the sheath gradually decreasing in the bundles towards the  
centre;  besides  the  xylem  and  phloem  elements,  each  bundle  surrounds  a  water  
containing cavity. 
50Powder - Powder light brick red; shows pieces of epidermis, ground tissue, vessels and  
sclerenchyma. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  2    per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6   per cent, Appendix       2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than  2.5    per cent, Appendix     2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than   15    per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than   17     per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sucrose.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Sara, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :B¤Æha¸a, Balya, Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¡tahara, V¤Àya, M£trala 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Bal¡ Taila, Navaratnar¡jam¥g¡nka Rasa. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Raktapitta, M£tra KÀaya. 
DOSE  - 200 - 400 ml in the juice form. 
   
  
5123. Indravaruni (Rt.)  
INDRAVËRUÛÌ (Root) 
Indrav¡ru¸¢  consists  of  dried  root  of  Citrullus  colocynthis  Schrad .  (Fam. 
Cucurbitaceae);  an  annual  or  perennial,  wild  herb  with  prostrate  or  climbing  stem,  
occurring throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Indravall¢, Indrav¡ru¸ik¡, Gav¡kÀ¢, áatakratulat¡, Endr¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Rakhal Sasa Mul 
English:Colocynth, Bitter apple 
Gujrati  :Indravaran, Indrayan, Indramanoa, Indarvaranova 
Hindi    :Indrayan 
Kannada:Havumekke, Havumakke, Indravaruni, Tuntikai, Kadukavadi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Valiyakattuvell,  Valiya Pekkumatti, Cheeiyakattuvellari 
Marathi:Endrayana, Indravarana 
Oriya   :Gothakakucti, Indrayanalata, Garukhiya 
Punjabi:Kaudatumma, Tumbi 
Tamil   :Paikamatti, Paythumatti, Varithummati, Aruthununatti 
Telugu  :Chedu Puchcha 
Urdu    :Hanzal, Indrayan 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root available in cut pieces of 2-7 cm long, 0.2-2.5 cm thick, cylindrical, slightly  
twisted;  dull  yellow;  longitudinal  fissures  present;  fracture,  short;  taste,  intensively  
bitter.
b) Microscopic 
Root - Mature root shows wavy outline consisting of 6-10 layers of rectangular, thick  
walled,  tangentially  elongated  cork  cells,  a  few  filled  with  dark  brown  contents;  
secondary  cortex  consists  of  10-15  layers  of  elliptical,  tangentially  elongated,  thin  
walled, parenchymatous  cells; secondary  phloem  a narrow-zone, composed  of sieve  
elements, parenchyma and medullary rays; xylem forms bulk of root, consisting of  
vessels, fibres, parenchyma and medullary rays; vessels mostly solitary or in groups of  
two to four having reticulate and spiral thickenings; fibres aseptate, thick-walled, pitted,  
elongated with pointed ends, lying around vessels; medullary rays poorly developed and  
uniseriate; starch grains oval to round in shape 2,5-7.5 µ in dia. mostly simple or rarely  
52compound having 2-3 components, found scattered throughout but more abundantly in  
phloem parenchyma. 
Powder - Dirty yellow; shows aseptate fibres, reticulate and spiral vessels, starch grains  
simple or occasionally compound measuring 2.5 - 7.5 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  2    per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8   per cent, Appendix       2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2   per cent, Appendix       2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     6.5   per cent, Appendix   2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  alcoholic  extract  of  the  drug  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  
Chloroform:Methanol (85:15) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent spots at Rf. 0.16  
and 0.30 (both blue). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the  
plate for about ten minutes at 105 °C two spots appear at Rf. 0.16 and 0.30 (both greyish  
blue). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Saponin and traces of Alkaloid.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, Recana 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Abhay¡riÀa,  Rodhr¡sava,  M¤tasaµj¢van¢  Sur¡,  B
¤hatmaµjiÀ¶h¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a, N¡r¡ya¸a C£r¸a,  
Mi¿raka Sheha, Triphal¡di Taila, Mah¡viÀagarbha  
Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Apac¢, áv¡sa, Gulma, K¡mal¡, K¡sa, K¤miroga, KuÀ¶ha, Prameha,  
Vra¸a, Pl¢h¡roga, ViÀavik¡ra, Ga¸·am¡l¡. 
DOSE  - 1-3 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
5324. Indravaruni (Lf .) 
INDRAVËRUÛÌ (Leaf) 
Indrav¡ru¸¢   consists  of  dried  leaves  of  Citrullus  colocynthis  Schrad .  (Fam. 
Cucurbitaceae);  an  annual  or  perennial,  wild  herb  with  prostrate  or  climbing  stem,  
occurring throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:áatakratulat¡, Eandr¢, Gav¡kÀ¢, Indrav¡ru¸ik¡, Indravall¢ 
Assamese:Nantiyah 
Bengali:Rahhalasa, Makhal 
English:Colocynth, Bitter Apple 
Gujrati  :Indrayana, Indrayanoa, Insbak 
Hindi    :Indrayana 
Kannada:Havumekke Kayi, Havamikke 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kattu vellari, Kadu Indrayan, Peykommuti 
Marathi:Indrayana, Kodu indrayan 
Oriya   :Gothkakudi, Mahakal 
Punjabi:Tumma, Jamtumma 
Tamil   :Peyakkumutti, Peytumatti, Peyththumatti, Peykhumutti, Verittumatti 
Telugu  :Chedupuchcha 
Urdu    :Hanzal, Indrayan 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaves very variable, 3.6-6.3 cm long, 2.5-5.0 cm wide, pinnately lobed in  
outline, generally 3 lobed, sometimes 3-7 lobed, middle lobe largest, each lobe deeply  
pinnatifid; petiole 1.3-2.5 cm long, entire leaf densely hirsute; taste, very bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Leaf-
Petiole  - shows ridged outline; epidermis single layered consisting of oval to rounded  
cells, covered with thick cuticle; hairs uniseriate, 2-4 celled, present on both surfaces;  
cortex  consisting  of  3-7  layers,  round  collenchymatous  cells,  followed  by  a  single  
layered endodermis; pith consisting of thin-walled, isodiametric, parenchymatous cells;  
vascular  bundles  generally  eight,  arranged  in  discontinuous  ring,  bicollateral,  each  
bundle surrounded by semilunar patches of sclerenchymatous cells towards endodermis. 
Midrib  - shows single layered epidermis, covered with cuticle on both surface; hair  
present on both surfaces, uniseriate, consisting of 2-3 cells, apical cells being pointed or  
54blunt; cortex consisting of 2-3 layers of collenchymatous cells on dorsal side, followed  
by thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; vascular bundles present, two well developed, one  
smaller and other larger, conjoint, bicollateral, composed of xylem and phloem. 
Lamina -shows single layered epidermis covered with cuticle, hairs similar to those of  
midrib and present on both surfaces, but more abundant on lower surface; palisade single  
layered, spongy parenchyma generally 5-8 layered, composed of thin walled, almost  
isodiametric cells, filled with chlorophyll contents and traversed by a number of veins,  
vein  islet number  29-38  per  sq. mm; palisade  ratio  2.75-3.75;  stomata  anomocytic 
present on both surfaces, stomatal index on upper surface 12.5-28.5 and on lower surface  
25.0 -31.2. 
Powder - Coarse, olive green; shows entire or broken pieces of hairs; epidermal cells  
polygonal,  moderately  thick-walled,  27.5-49.5 µ long  and  19-27  µ wide;  spongy 
parenchyma cells, anomocytic type of stomata and xylem vessels. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than 2     per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  18    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   6   per cent, Appendix       2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than    7    per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    18    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  alcoholic  extract  of  the  drug  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  n-
Butanol :Acetic acid: Water (4:1:5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) five fluorescent zones at  
Rf. 0.46, 0.61, 0.75, 0.94 (all green) and 0.97 (red). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-
Sulphuric acid reagent and on heating the plate for ten minutes at 105 °C four spots appear  
at Rf. 0.61 (green), 0.75 (green), 0.83 (grey) and 0.94 (grey). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Colocynthin, traces of an Alkaloid and Flavonoids.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, Recana 
 
55IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - N¢l¢ Bh¤´g¡di Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Ke¿ap¡ta, Palita, KuÀ¶haroga. 
DOSE  - For external use only 
   
  
5625. Jambu (Sd.)  
JAMBÍ (Seed) 
Jamb£ consists of dried seeds of  Syzygium cuminii  (Linn.) Skeels Syn.  Eugenia 
jambolana Lam.; E. cuminii Druce. (Fam. Myrtaceae); a large evergreen tree, attaining a  
height of 30 m and a girth of 3.6 m with a bole up to 15 m, found throughout India upto an  
altitude of 1,800 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:-- 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Badjam, Kalajam 
English:Jambul tree 
Gujrati  :Gambu, Jamun 
Hindi    :Jamuna 
Kannada:Nerale Beeja, Jambu Nerale 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Njaval 
Marathi:Jambul 
Oriya   :Jam Kol, Jamu Kol 
Punjabi:Jaamun 
Tamil   :Naval 
Telugu  :Alla Nereduchettu, Neredu chettu 
Urdu    :Jamun 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
2-5 seeds, compressed together into a mass resembling a single seed, the  
whole seed enclosed in a cream coloured, coriaceous covering, smooth, oval or roundish,  
1 cm long, 1 cm wide, brownish-black; taste, astringent. 
b) Microscopic 
Seed - Shows cotyledons consisting of single layered epidermis, mesophyll composed of  
isodiametric, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells fully packed with simple starch grains,  
oval, rounded measuring 7-28 µ  in dia., a few schizogenous cavities are also found. 
Powder - Brown coloured; shows a few parenchymatous cells and numerous oval,  
rounded starch grains, measuring 7-28 µ  in diameter. 
57IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than  1    per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  5    per cent, Appendix       2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than  1    per cent, Appendix       2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than    6    per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    15   per cent, Appendix     2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  alcoholic  extract  of  the  drug  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  
Toluene:Ethylaceate (90: 10) shows under U.V. light (366 nm) one fluorescent zone at Rf.  
0.30 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour four spots appear at Rf. 0.12, 0.20, 0.30 and  
0.95 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate  
for ten minutes at 105 °C, three spots appear at Rf. 0.20, 0.30 and 0.95 and 0.95 (all violet).  
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycoside (Jamboline), Tannin, Ellagic acid and Gallic acid.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Gr¡h¢, Kaphahara, Pittahara, ViÀ¶ambhi, V¡tala 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - PuÀy¡nuga C£r¸a. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Madhumeha, Udakameha. 
DOSE  - 3-6 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
5826. Jambu (St.Bk.)  
JAMBÍ (Stem Bark) 
Jamb£  consists  of  dried  stem bark  of  Syzygium cuminii  (Linn.)  Skeels Syn.  
Eugenia jambolana  Lam.;  E. cuminii  Druce. (Fam. Myrtaceae); a large evergreen tree,  
attaining a height of 30 m and a girth of 3.6 m with a bole up to 15 m, found throughout  
India upto an altitude of 1,800 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Mahajambu, Ksudrajambu 
Assamese:Jam 
Bengali:Jaam 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Jambu, Jambuda 
Hindi    :Jomuna, Raja Jambu 
Kannada:Merale, Jamneralae, Jambu, Neralamara 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Njaval, Naval 
Marathi:Jambhool 
Oriya   :Jamukoli, Jamu, Jam 
Punjabi:Jammu 
Tamil   :Naaval, Navval Sambu, Mahamaram, Nagal 
Telugu  :Nesedu 
Urdu    :Jamun 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in slightly curved or flat pieces, 0.5-2.5 cm thick, younger  
bark  mostly  channelled,  external  surface  more  or  less  rough  and  rugged  due  to  
exfoliation and vertical cracks, light grey to ash coloured, internal surface fibrous,  
rough, and reddish brown, fracture, short and splintery; taste, astringent. 
b) Microscopic 
Stem Bark -Mature bark shows a wide zone of cork differentiated into upper and lower  
cork zones, forming a rhytidoma; cork consisting of tangentially elongated rectangular  
cells, upper few layers thick, stratified and reddish-brown, having groups of 2-4 stone  
cells and crushed elements of phloem; lower cork thin and colourless; cork cambium not  
distinct;  secondary  phloem  composed  of  sieve  elements,  and  phloem  rays;  phloem  
parenchyma thin-walled and polyhedral in shape; stone cells, oval to angular, elongated;  
fibres aseptate; both stone cells and fibres single or in groups present throughout this  
59region; phloem rays 1-4 cells wide; reddish-brown content, rosette crystals of calcium  
oxalate and simple, round to oval starch grains, measuring 5-11 µ  in diameter 
Powder - Light brown; shows fragments of thin-walled cork cells, aseptate fibres; single  
or in groups, oval to angular, elongated, stone cells; rosette and prismatic crystals of  
calcium oxalate and simple, round to oval starch grains, measuring 5-11 µ   in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than 2     per cent, Appendix       2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  11    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1   per cent, Appendix       2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than    9    per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than    11    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannins 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Gr¡h¢, Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¡tala, Stambhaka, K¤midoÀaghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - U¿¢r¡sava. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Atis¡ra, Raktapitta. 
DOSE  - 10-20 g. of the drug for decoction. 
   
  
6027. Jayapala (Sd.)  
JAYAPËLA (Seed) 
Jayap¡la  consists of dried seed of Croton tiglium Linn. (Fam. Euphorbiaceae); a  
small evergreen tree, 5-7 m high, found throughout tropical India. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Mukula, Tinti·¢phala. 
Assamese:Kanibish 
Bengali:Jaipala 
English:Croton 
Gujrati  :Nepalo, Jamalagota 
Hindi    :Jamalgota 
Kannada:Nepal, Japal beej, Japala, Nervala 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Nervalam, Neervalam 
Marathi:Jepal, Japal 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Japolota 
Tamil   :Nervalam, Neervalam, Valam 
Telugu  :Nepalamu 
Urdu    :Jamalgota 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seed albuminous, ovate, oblong, slightly quadrangular, convex on dorsal and  
somewhat flattened on ventral surface, about 12 mm in length and resemble castor seed  
in  shape,  dull  cinnamon-brown,  often  mottled  with  black  due  to  abrasion  in  testa,  
caruncle easily detatched and usually absent, hilum on ventral side less distinct than that  
of castor seed, raphe runs along ventral surface of seed, terminating in a dark chalaza at  
opposite extremity, kernel yellowish and oily, consisting of a large endosperm, enclosing  
papery cotyledons and a small radicle, no marked odour; kernel gives at first oily taste  
followed by an unpleasant acridity. 
b) Microscopic 
Seed - Shows a hard testa, consisting of an epidermal layer, covered externally with a  
thick cuticle and composed of oval and tangentially elongated cells, filled with brownish  
content;  epidermis  followed  by  a layer  of  radially  elongated  cells, slightly  bent  at  
middle, upper half portion filled with reddish-brown and lower half filled with yellow  
contents;  inner  most  zone  consists  of  tangentially  elongated,  thin-walled  cells;  
61endosperm consists of polygonal parenchymatous cells filled with oil globules, a few  
cells having rosette crystals of calciwn oxalate; central region of endosperm shows a  
dicotyledonous embryo consisting of thin-walled parenchymatous cells. 
Powder - White with black particles of testa; under microscope shows elongated cells  
containing reddish-brown and yellow contents, oil globules and a few rosette crystals of  
calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol :  
Acetic acid : Water (4: 1 :5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) three spots at Rf. 0.34, 0.54 and  
0.84 (all violet). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.29, 0.39,  
0.49, 0.63 and 0.90 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent  
and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes three spots appear at Rf. 0.34 (grey), 0.54  
(yellow), 0.84 (brown).
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed oil, Resins & Phorbol esters. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, Recana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Icch¡bhed¢ Rasa, A¿vaka´cuk¢ Rasa. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Jvara, Udararoga, Vibandha 
DOSE  - 6-12 mg. of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
6228. Jayanti (Lf.)  
JAYANÙÌ (Leaf) 
Jayan¶¢consists of fresh and dried leaf of  Sesbania sesban  (Linn.) Merr.,Syn.  S. 
aegyptiaca Pers. (Fam. Fabaceae); a quick growing, short lived shrub, 1.8-6 m high, found  
cultivated throughout plains of the country upto an altitude of 1200 m. 
 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Jayant¢, Jay¡, á£kÀma patra, 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Jayanti 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Rajashinganee, Jayanti 
Hindi    :Jaita, jayata 
Kannada:Arinintajinamgi, Karijimangai, Arishimajingai, 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Semp, Atti, Itthikkanni 
Marathi:Jait 
Oriya   :Jayantipatra 
Punjabi:Jainta 
Tamil   :Karum-sempai 
Telugu  :Sominta, Jalugu, Nelichettu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaves pinnately compound, 7.5-15.5 cm long, rachis shortly produced above last  
pair of leaflet; paripinnate, leaflets 6-16 pairs, opposite, linear, oblong, glabrous, entire,  
mucronate to acuminate, very shortly stalked, 1.0-3.3 cm long, 0.3-0.8 cm wide. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Leaflet
Rachis - shows single layered epidermis, followed by 2-3 layered collenchymatous and  
4- 7 layered round, thin-walled parenchymatous cells; vascular bundles arranged in a  
ring,  having  secretory  cavities  in  phloem,  each  bundle  covered  externally  with  
sclerenchymatous sheath, one smaller vascular bundle present in both the wings; pith  
small, consisting of thin-walled, polygonal, parenchymatous cells. 
Lamina - shows single layered epidermis on both surfaces, stomata anisocytic, present  
on both surfaces, palisade single layered, spongy parenchyma consisting of round cells,  
63small veins situated between palisade and spongy parenchyma cells, stomatal index on  
upper surface 11-20 and on lower surface 11-25, palisade ratio 3.25-4.50 and vein islet  
number 27-36 per square mm. 
Powder - Dull green; shows spongy parenchyma, palisade cells; xylem vessels with  
scalariform thickening and stomata. 
  
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     25  per cent, Appendix     2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene :  
Ethylacetate (90: 10) shows under U.V. (366 nm) six fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.05, 0.11,  
0.19, 0.29, 0.56 (all pink) and 0.97 (yellow). On exposure to Iodine vapour ten spots  
appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.11, 0.19, 0.29, 0.37, 0.48, 0.56, 0.69, 0.91 and 0.97 (all yellow). On  
spraying with 5 % Methanolic-Phosphomolybdic acid reagent and heating the plate at  
105°C for ten minutes nine spots appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.11, 0.19, 0.29, 0.37, 0.48, 0.56,  
0.91 and 0.97 (all grey). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Protein, Calcium and Phosphorus.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, Ras¡yana, V¡tahara, Ka¸¶ha¿odhana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Ratnagiri Rasa, Vajrakap¡¶a Rasa. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - M£trak¤cchra, Galaga¸·a, ViÀaroga. 
DOSE  - 3-6 g. in powder form.  
   
  
6429. Jyotishmati (Sd.) 
JYOTIâMATÌ (Seed) 
JyotiÀmat¢ consists of dried, brownish-orange, ripe seeds, devoid of capsule wall of  
Celastrus paniculatus Willd. (Fam. Celastraceae); a large climbing shrub, mostly found all  
over the hilly parts of the country upto an altitude of 1200 m. 
 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:-- 
Assamese:Kapalphotla 
Bengali:-- 
English:Staff tree 
Gujrati  :Malkangani 
Hindi    :Malkangani 
Kannada:Doddaganugae, Gangunge beeja, Gangunge humpu, Kangondiballi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Ceruppunnari, Uzhinja 
Marathi:Malkangoni 
Oriya   :Malkanguni, lyotishmati 
Punjabi:Malkangoni 
Tamil   :Valuluvai 
Telugu  :Malkangani, Peddamaveru 
Urdu    :Malkangani 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Dried ripe seeds more or less covered by orange-red crusty aril, seed without aril  
also prescent, measuring 5-6 mm in length and 2.5-3.35 mm in breadth, a few roughly  
three sided being convex on the sides and a few two sided with one convex and other  
more or less flat side, one edge of many seeds show a faint ridge or raphe on the whole  
margin;  surface  generally  smooth  and-  hard;  colour,  light  to  dark  brown;  odour,  
unpleasant; taste, bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Seed - Shows single layered epidermis covered externally with thick cuticle and filled  
with tannin, followed by 4-6 layers of thin-walled, collapsed, parenchymatous cells and  
layer of radially elongated stone cells; parenchyma of top one or two layers longer than  
of  the  below  with  triangular  intercellular  spaces;  inner  most  layer  of  parenchyma  
containing prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; beneath stone cells layer quadrangular  
to octagonal,  tangentially  elongated cells filled with brownish  contents;  endosperm  
65composed  of  polygonal,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells  having  oil  gloubles  and  
aleurone grains; embryo spathulate in fleshy endosperm containing oil globules and  
aleurone grains. 
Powder -  Oily,  dark  brown;  under  microscope  shows  groups  of  endospermic  
parenchyma, stone cells, oil globules and aleurone grains and shows fluorescence under  
U.V. light as following :-
Powder as such : Grenish -brown
Powder + 1 N NaOH in 
Methanol :Light green
Powder + Nitrocellulose in 
Amyl Acetate :Yellowish-green
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Oil contents                            Not less than      45   per cent, Appendix   2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  alcoholic  extract  of  drug  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Toluene  :  
Ethylacetate (90 : 10) shows two spots at Rf. 0.82 (pink) & 0.94 (yellow) in visible light.  
Under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones visible at Rf. 0.54, 0.82, 0.89, (all blue) &  
0.94 (yellow). On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.15, 0.20,  
0.35, 0.54, 0.63, 0.82 & 0.89 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid  
reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes four spots appear at Rf. 0.35, 0.54  
(both blue), 0.82, 0.89 (both greenish blue). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids, Oil and Tannins. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Sara, UÀ¸a, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :(Prabh¡va  :   Meddhya),  áirovirecanopaga,  D¢pana,  Kaphahara,  
V¡maka, V¡tahara, Virecaka, Meddhya 
66 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Sm¤tis¡gara Rasa, JyotiÀmat¢ Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - V¡tavy¡dh¢, Sm¤tidaurbalya, ávitra. 
DOSE  - Seed: 1-2 g. Oil : 5-15 drops.  
   
  
6730. Kadamba (St.Bk.)  
KADAMBA (Stem Bark)  
Kadamba consists of dried stem bark of  Anthocephalus cadamba  Miq., Syn.  A. 
indicus A. Rich. (Fam. Rubiaceae), a deciduous, large tree, attaining a height of 18 m with  
a girth of about 2 m, found all over India on the slopes of evergreen forests upto 500 m and  
planted in parks and near temples etc. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:V¤tta PuÀpa, Priyka 
Assamese:Roghu, Kadam 
Bengali:Kadam 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Kadamb, Kadam 
Hindi    :Kadam, Kadamba 
Kannada:Kadamba, Kadamba mara, Kadavala, Neirumavinamara 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Attutekka, Katampu 
Marathi:Kadamb 
Oriya   :Holiptiya, Kadamba Nipo, Kadambal 
Punjabi:Kadamb 
Tamil   :Arattam,  Indulam,  Kadappai,  Vellai  Kadambam,  Vellaikhadambu,  
Kadambu Needam, Vellai Kadambu 
Telugu  :Kadambamu, Kadimi Chettu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark externally greyish-green with shallow fissures, exfoliating in small irregular  
woody scales, internally light reddish to reddish-brown, easily separates from inner bark  
into tangential strips; taste, bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Stem Bark -Outer most zone of the bark shows rhytidoma with cork 4-6 layers wide,  
composed of thin-walled, rectangular cells; phloem fibres same in structure as found in  
inner bark; middle bark composed of rectangular or tangentially elongated cells without  
intercellular spaces, some cells contain chlorophyll, most cells thick-walled but a few  
thin-walled containing prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, a few cells with brown  
contents; inner bark consists of groups of fibres alternating with phloem, traversed by  
uni to triseriate, elongated cells of phloem rays; phloem composed  of sieve tubes,  
68phloem fibres, companion cells and phloem parenchyma; cells of phloem parenchyma  
thinwalled and polygonal; phloem fibres lignified with narrow lumen and pointed ends;  
outer region of inner bark and phloem tissues thin-walled, comparatively large and  
consisting of rounded to polygonal cells a few phloem cells in this region compressed;  
phloem  rays  uni-to  triseriate  and  arranged  close  to  one  another, cells  distinct  and  
slightly elongated, some cells at the periphery of inner bark tilled with chlorophyll  
contents. 
Powder  -  Brown;  shows  fragments  of  cork  cells,  phloem  cells,  fibres,  and  a  few  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   9    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T. L C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Ethylacetate :  
Methanol : Water (100:13.5:10) shows under U.V (366 nm) nine fluorescent zones at Rf.  
0.03, 0.13, 0.21, 0.31, 0.57, 0.64, 0.79, 0.83 and 0.90 (all yellow) On spraying with 5%  
Methanolic Sulphuric acid reagent on heating the plate at 110 °C for ten minutes four  
spots appear at Rf. 0.63 (yellowish grey), 0.70 (orange yellow), 0.79 (grey) and 0.90  
(grey). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids, Steroids, Fats and Reducing Sugars
   
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Lava¸a, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Pittahara, V¡tahara, Vra¸aropa¸a, Vedan¡st¡pana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Nygrodh¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a, Graha¸¢mihira Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - D¡ha, Raktapitta, Vra¸a, YonidoÀa, ViÀavra¸a (DanÀaja Vra¸a). 
DOSE  - 0.5 - 1.5 g. of the drug in powder form. 
69 31. Kakamachi (W.P.)  
KËKAMËCÌ (Whole Plant)  
K¡kam¡c¢  consists  of  the  dried  whole  plant  of  Solanum  nigrum  Linn.  (Fam. 
Solanaceae); a herbaceous annual weed, 30-45 cm high, found throughout the country in  
dry parts, quite common in cultivated lands, road sides and gardens.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:DhvankÀam¡c¢ 
Assamese:Kakamachi, Pikachia, Datkachu 
Bengali:Gudakamai 
English:Garden Night Shade 
Gujrati  :Piludi 
Hindi    :Makoya 
Kannada:Ganikayeagida, Ganikegida, ganike, Ganikesopu, Kage hanninagids 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Karinthakkali, Manatakkali, Manjathakkali 
Marathi:Kamoni 
Oriya   :Lunlunia, Lunilunika 
Punjabi:Mako 
Tamil   :Manarthakkali, Manaththakkali, Manitakkali, Maniththakkali 
Telugu  :Kamanchi 
Urdu    :Makoh 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root  - Tap root with a few branches and numerous small lateral roots, externally  
smooth, pale brown; bark thin, easily peeled off exposing pale yellow wood. 
Stem - Erect, glabrous or pubescent, green, rounded at the basal region and angular at  
the apical region, slightly woody and branched. 
Leaf - Simple, 2.5-8.5 cm long and 2.5 cm wide, ovate or oblong, sinuate, toothed or  
lobed, narrowed at both ends; petiolate, thin. 
Flower - Small, extra-axillary, sub-umbellate, 3-8 flowered cymes, peduncles 6-20 mm  
long, slender; pedicels 6-10 mm long, very slender; calyx 2-3 mm long, glabrous, five  
lobed, oblong, obtuse, 1.25 mm long; corolla 4-8 mm long, divided more than half way  
down into 5 oblong sub-acute lobes, white or pale violet; filaments short, flattened,  
hairy at base; anther 1.2-2.5 mm long, yellowish, oblong, obtuse notched at apex; ovary  
globose, glabrous; style cylindric, hairy in lower part. 
70Fruit - A berry, 6mm in dia., obtuse, usually purplish-black but sometimes red, yellow or  
black; smooth shining
Seed - Discoid, 1.5 mm in dia., smooth, minutely pitted, yellow. 
b) Microscopic 
Root -Shows cork consisting of 2-4 rows of tangentially elongated cells; cortex of large,  
slightly elongated, thin-walled cells having patches of lignified sclerenchyma fibres,  
most of the cortical cells contain oval to round, starch grains, measuring 2.5-11 µ in 
dia.,  single  or  with  two  or  rarely  3  components;  a  few  parenchyma  cells  contain  
microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate; phloem consists of thin-walled, polygonal  
cells, phloem rays uniseriate, filled with starch grains; xylem composed of vessels and  
parenchyma; vessels arranged in groups of 2-4 in radial rows; parenchyma thick-walled  
containing microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate; rays composed of thin-walled,  
radially elongated cells. 
Stem - Shows single layered, epidermis of cubical to barrel-shaped cells, covered with  
thick,  slightly  striated  cuticle; trichomes  multicellular, uniseriate;  secondary  cortex  
composed of 2-4 layered collenchyma, but 4- 10 layered in angular parts; tangentially  
elongated,'  oval  parenchymatous  cells,  some  containing  numerous  microsphenoidal  
crystals of calcium oxalate and simple, oval to round starch grains, measuring 2.5-8.25  
µ in dia., endoderrnis single layered; pericycle consists of intermittent ring of patches  
of fibres either isolated or in groups of 2-4; vascular bundles-collateral, conjoint and  
open; cambium 2-4 layered; xylem vessels arranged radially smaller being towards  
centre, showing spiral thickening and simple perforations; tracheids pointed tipped and  
with pitted walls; xylem rays homogenous, uniseriate; internal phloem, in small or large  
patches, usually accompanied by fibres, embedded in perimedullary zones; pith large,  
composed of thin-walled, parenchymatous cells with small intercellular spaces, a few  
cells containing microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate. 
Leaf-
Petiole - shows single layered epidermis of oval or tangentially elongated cells, covered  
with striated cuticle; covering trichomes, uniseriate, 3-5 celled having pointed tips and  
warty walls, glandular hairs with 1-2 celled stalk and 2-7 celled head; epidermis single  
layered;  chlorenchyma  2-3  layered,  compactly  arranged;  5-8  layered  parenchyma  
consisting of round, thin-walled cells with smaller intercellular spaces, a few containing  
microsphenoidal  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  central  vascular  bundle  shallow,  arc-
shaped,  bicollateral;  two  smaller  bundles  present  laterally  on  either  side  of  main  
vascular bundles one in each lateral wing of the petiole. 
Midrib - shows upper and lower epidermis of round to oval cells, covered with striated  
cuticle, trichomes similar to those found on petiole; collenchyma 2-3 layered on both  
surfaces; parenchyma 4-6  layered, thin-walled with  small intercellular  spaces; arc-
71shaped bicollateral vascular bundle placed centrally. 
Lamina - dorsiventral, both upper and lower epidermis single layered, composed of oval  
to  tangentially  elongated  cells  covered  with  thick  cuticle;  palisade  single  layered;  
spongy parenchyma 4-6 layered containing chloroplasts with intercellular spaces; a few  
vessels  with  spiral  thickenings,  present  beneath  palisade  parenchyma;  in  surface  
preparation a large number of multicellular, warty hairs with pointed tips and glandular  
hairs are present; epidermis with irregular outline, stomata anisocytic, scattered on both  
surfaces but more abundant in lower surface; palisade ratio 2-4; vein islet number 7-10;  
stomatal index 15-17 on upper epidermis and 22-23 on lower epidermis. 
Fruit - Shows thin, papery epicarp, pulpy mesocarp and exile placentation; seeds at first  
remain attached to the placenta but afterwards separate from it and lie free in pulp of  
fruit. 
Powder  - Creamish-green; shows fragments of vessels with spiral thickening; a few  
broken pieces of pointed, unicellular hairs; single, oval to round and compound with  
three components of starch grains, measuring 2.5 - 11  µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   16   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene :  
Ethylacetate (90 : 10) shows two spots at Rf. 0.06 & 0.34 (both brown) in visible light.  
Under U.V. light (366 nm) two fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.06 & 0.34 (both  
pink). On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.06, 034 and 0.97 (all  
yellow). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids and Saponins.
  
72PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Sara, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Bhedana, H¤dya, Kaphahara, Pittahara, Ras¡yana, Svarya, V¡tahara, V
¤Àya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - H¤day¡r¸ava Rasa, Mah¡ ViÀagarbha Taila, Rasar¡ja  
Rasa. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - áotha, Ar¿a, H¤droga, Jvara, Ka¸·u, KuÀ¶ha, Prameha, Hikk¡.  
Chardi, Netraroga. 
DOSE  - 5 -10 ml. of the drug in juice form. 
   
  
7332. Kamala (Fl.)  
KAMALA (Flower)  
Kamala consists of dried flowers (devoid of stalk) of  Nelumbo nucifera  Gaertn. 
Syn.  Nelumbium speciosum  Willd.  (Fam.  Nymphaeaceae); a  large,  aquatic  herb  with  
creeping stem, occurring throughout warmer parts of the country upto an altitude of 1000  
m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Abja, Aravinda, Padma, Kalh¡ra, Sitopala, Pankaja 
Assamese:Podum 
Bengali:Padma Phool, Salaphool 
English:Lotus 
Gujrati  :Kamal, 
Hindi    :Kamal, Kanwal 
Kannada:Kamal, Tavare, Naidile, Tavaregedd 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Tamara, Venthamara, Chenthamara, Senthamara 
Marathi:Komala 
Oriya   :Padma 
Punjabi:Kanwal, Pamposh 
Tamil   :Tamarai, Thamaraipoo, Aravindan, Paduman, Kamalam, Sarojam 
Telugu  :Kaluva, Tamarapuvow 
Urdu    :Kamal 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug  occurs  as  entire  or  pieces  of  flowers,  comprising  of  calyx,  corolla,  
androecium, gynoecium and thalamus; entire flower 10-15 cm in dia., yellowish-brown;  
sepals leaf-like, crimpled, 3-5 cm long, 1.3-2 cm wide, dark brown, broken pieces also  
occur; petals numerous, crimp led, elliptic, obtuse, membranous, finely veined, 2-4 cm  
long, 1.2-2 cm wide yellowish-brown; anther, erect, linear 1.4-2 cm long, extended into  
clavate appendages; gynoceium apocarpous; carpels many, free, embedded in a creamy,  
top shaped fleshy thalamus (torus) 3-5 cm long and 2.5-3 cm wide; fruit an etaerio of  
achenes, becoming loose in their sockets when ripe; seed hard, black, starchy and large. 
74b) Microscopic 
Flower
Petal - shows single layered epidermis on both surfaces, consisting of rectangular cells  
covered with striated cuticle; ground tissue consisting of polygonal, parenchymatous  
cells with wide air-sacs. 
Stamen
Filament  - filament appears circular in outline, consisting of single layered epidermis  
covered  with  striated  cuticle;  followed  by  ground  tissue  of  oval,  angular,  
parenchymatous  cell;  vascular  bundle  single,  present  in  centre  consisting  of  usual  
elements of xylem and phloem tissues. 
Anther  -  shows  four  chambered  anther,  two  on  either  sides,  connected  by  
parenchymatous cells containing vascular bundle; anther consists of a single layer of  
epidermis,  composed  of  thin-walled,  rectangular,  parenchymatous  cells  followed  by  
single layer of endothe cium consisting of thin-walled, columnar, parenchymatous cells;  
spore sac contains yel low, spherical pollen grains with smooth exine and intine walls,  
measuring 50-61 µ in diameter. 
Powder - Dusty brown; shows fragments of vessels with spiral thickening, spherical,  
yellow pollen grains, measuring 50-61 µ  in dia. having smooth exine and intine. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   12   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloid (Nelumbine).
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :á¢ta, Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Kaphahara, M£tra Virajan¢ya, Pittahara, Sant¡pahara, Var¸ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Aravind¡sava, Catura Kaval Gh¤ta. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Raktapitta, Visarpa, T¤Àn¡ D¡ha, ViÀavik¡ra. 
DOSE  - 12 -24 g. of the drug for decoction. 
7533. Kapittha (Fr. Pulp.)  
KAPITTHA (Fruit Pulp)  
Kapittha consists of dried pulp of mature fruit of Feronia limonia (Linn.) Swingle. 
Syn. F. elephantum Correa (Faro. Rutaceae); a deciduous, glabrous tree with strong, sharp,  
straight, axillary thorns, found throughout the plains of India, Siwalik range and forests, at  
base of Himalayas upto an elevation of 450 m; often cultivated in many parts of India; fruit  
rind is removed and the pulp is bruised and dried. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Danta áatha, Kapipriya 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Kayet Bael, Kavataleal, Kavita 
English:Wood apple 
Gujrati  :Kotha, Kondhu 
Hindi    :Kaitha 
Kannada:Bekalu, Belada hannu, Bilvara, Belalu, Balada, Haminamara 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Vilar maram, Villanga Kaaya 
Marathi:Kavatha 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Kainth 
Tamil   :Vilamaram, Vilangai 
Telugu  :Velaga 
Urdu    :Kaith 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit pulp occurs mostly in broken pieces and sometimes entire, measuring about  
4-5 cm in dia; semicircular, rough, hard, having longitudinal ridges and furrows; reddish  
brown; odour, aromatic; taste, sour.
b) Microscopic 
Fruit Pulp - shows irregular, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; numerous idioblast cells  
filled  with  reddish-brown  content;  stone  cells,  slightly  triangular  and  oval,  with  
concentric striations and narrow lumen, found in groups; a few fibro-vascular bundles  
distributed in the pulp; xylem vessels having spiral thickenings. 
Powder -  Reddish-brown;  shows  fragments  of  fibro-vascular  bundles,  stone  cells,  
triangular to oval with concentric striations and narrow lumen, vessels and idioblast  
filled with cell content. 
76IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     25   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  alcoholic  extract  of  the  drug  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  
Chloroform :Ethylacetate : Formic acid (5:4:1) shows one spot at Rf. 0.91 (grey) in  
visible light. Under U.V. (366 nm) three fluorescent zones appear at Rf 0.14 (sky blue),  
0.91 (blue) and 0.95 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf. 0.06,  
0.12, 0.37, 0.50, 6.91 and 0.95 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric  
acid reagent and heating the plate at 110 °C for ten minutes five spots appear at Rf. 0.12  
(brown), 0.37 (brown), 0.50 (violet), 0.91 (violet) and 0.95 (violet) .
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Citric acid and Mucilage. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, KaÀ¡ya, Unripe Pulp: Amla, KaÀ¡ya  
Guna :Laghu, Unripe Pulp: Guru 
Virya :á¢ta, Unripe Pulp: UÀna 
Vipaka :Madhura, Unripe Pulp: Amla 
Karma :V¤Àya,  Pittav¡tahara,  Sangr¡h¢,  Vra¸an¡¿aka,  Unripe  Pulp:  
Kaphaghna, Lekhana,  Gr¡h¢, V¡tala 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Kapitth¡À¶aka C£r¸a, Yav¡ny¡di C£r¸a. 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  áv¡sa,  Ripe-T¤À¡,  Hikk¡,  V¡mi,  Unripe-Graha¸¢  Roga,  
Agnim¡ndya. 
DOSE  - 1-3 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
7734. Karamarda (St.Bk.)  
KARAMARDA (Stem Bark)  
Karamarda  consists  of  dried  stem  bark  of  Carissa  carandas  Linn.  (Fam  . 
Apocynaceae); a dichotomously branched large shrub or small tree, met throughout India  
in wild state, sometimes cultivated. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Krsnapakphala 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Karamach 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Karamadan 
Hindi    :Karijige 
Kannada:Karimkar 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Karimkar 
Marathi:Karamanda 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Garna 
Tamil   :Kalakke 
Telugu  :-- 
Urdu    :Karaunda 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark  occurs  in  small  and  thin,  flat  or  slightly  curved  pieces, rough  due  to  
longitudinal  striations;  external  surface  brownish-grey,  internal  surface  grey  and  
smooth, light in weight; fracture, short. 
b) Microscopic 
Stem Bark -Mature bark shows a wide zone of stratified cork having lenticels at a few  
places; secondary cortex composed of thin-walled, tubular, parenchymatous cells having  
groups of stone cells; cortical fibres in single or groups of 2-3, a few stone cells attached  
with cortical fibres; secondary phloem consisting of usual elements; prismatic crystals  
of calcium oxalate found scattered in cortical cells and phloem parenchyma; starch  
grains simple, measuring 3-7 µ  in dia. and compound having 2-3 components, found  
scattered in cortical and phloem parenchyma cells. 
Powder - Greyish-brown, shows single and groups of stone cells, prismatic crystals of  
calcium oxalate, simple and compound starch grains, measuring 3-7 µ in dia.
78IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   12   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica Gel 'G' plate using Toluene;  
Ethylacetate (9 : 1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) one fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.52 (light  
sky blue). On spraying with Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate  
for about fifteen minutes at 1050C four spots appear at Rf. 0.35, 0.58 (both light grey),  
0.90 (pink) and 0.97 (violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycosides and â-Sitosterol. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Amla 
Guna :Guru, Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittakara, V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Marma Gu¶¢k¡. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - KuÀthahara. 
DOSE  - 48 g. of the drug for decoction. 
   
  
7935. Karanja (Rt. Bk.)  
KARAØJA (Root Bark) 
Karaµja consists of dried root bark of  Pongamia pinnata  (Linn.) Merr., Syn.  P. 
glabra  Vent. (Fam. Fabaceae), a glabrous tree, upto 18 m or sometimes more in height,  
found almost throughout the country upto an altitude of 1200 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Karaµjaka, Naktam¡la, Nakt¡hv¡, Gh¤takaraµja 
Assamese:Korach 
Bengali:Natakaranja, Dahara karanja 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Kanaji 
Hindi    :Karanj 
Kannada:Honge 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Pungu, Ungu 
Marathi:Karanja 
Oriya   :Karanja 
Punjabi:Karanj 
Tamil   :Pungai 
Telugu  :Ganuga 
Urdu    :Karanj 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in pieces of varying sizes; reddish-brown externally and yellowish -
white, internally; external surface rough, due to peeling off, of outer thin skin and  
presence of numerous irregularly scattered and transversely arranged rows of lenticels;  
fracture, fibrous; taste, very bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Root Bark -Shows cork consisting or 5-15 or more rows of rectangular, tangentially  
elongated, thin-walled, cells; secondary cortex wide composed of polygonal, tangentially  
elongated cells, most of the cells containing both simple and compound starch grains  
having 2-5 components round to oval in shape, 3-11  µ in dia., a few cells contain  
yellowish-brown contents and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; stone cells found  
scattered in this region in singles and groups, single cells of varying shape and size;  
secondary phloem very wide, composed of tangentially arranged fibres alternating with  
sieve  tubes  and  phloem  parenchyma,  traversed  by  phloem  rays;  most  of  phloem  
80parenchyma cells contain starch grains and crystals, similar to those present in secondary  
cortex; phloem rays many, mostly straight, 1-2 seriate, consisting of thin-walled, radially  
elongated cells towards inner region and tangentially elongated towards periphery; most  
of ray cells contain starch grain, similar to those present in secondary cortex. 
Powder -Creamish-yellow; shows thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, cork cells, phloem  
fibres,  stone  cells  and  simple  and  compound  starch  grains  measuring  3-11   µ in 
diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3.5  per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     17   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  alcoholic  extract  of  the  drug  on  Silica  Gel  'G'  plate  using  
Toluene:Ethylacetate (9:1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) eleven fluorescent zones at Rf.  
0.04 (blue), 0.08 (greenish blue), 0.13 (Sky blue), 0.18 (blue) 0.25 (sky blue), 0.31 (sky  
blue), 0.37 (greenish yellow), 0.42 (sky blue), 0.47 (greenish yellow), 0.51 (light blue),  
0.80 (light blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour nine spots appear at Rf. 0.09, 0.18, 0.31,  
0.37, 0.47, 0.47, 0.51, 0.80 and 0.98 (all yellow).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Flavones Kanugin, Demethoxy-kanugin 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¡tahara, Ka¸·£ghna, ViÀaghma, Vra¸a¿odhana  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Prabhaµajana Vimardana Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  K¤miroga,  Ka¸·u,  Prameha,  KuÀtha,  DuÀ¶avra¸a,  Yoniroga,  
Ëntravidradhi. 
DOSE  - 1-3 g. of the drug for decoction. 
   
8136. Karanja (Rt.)  
KARAØJA (Root) 
Karaµja consists of dried root of Pongamia pinnata (Linn.) Merr., Syn. P. glabra 
Vent. (Fam. Fabaceae); a glabrous tree, upto 18 m or sometimes more in height, found  
almost throughout the country upto an altitude of 1200 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Gh¤takaraµja, Karaµjaka, Nakt¡hv¡, Naktam¡la 
Assamese:Korach 
Bengali:Dahara karanja, Natakaranja 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Kanaji 
Hindi    :Karanj 
Kannada:Honge 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Pungu, Ungu 
Marathi:Karanja 
Oriya   :Karanja 
Punjabi:Karanj 
Tamil   :Pungai 
Telugu  :Ganuga, Kanuga 
Urdu    :Karanj 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in pieces of varying sizes, bark, reddish-brown or dull brown, rough  
due to the presence of numerous, irregularly distributed, and also transversely arranged  
rows of lenticels, bark does not easily separate from xylem, internally light yellow, light  
in weight, fracture, fibrous in bark portion and hard to break in xylem portion where the  
root is thick when in pieces splits longitudinally; taste, bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Root -Shows cork consisting of 5-15 or more rows of rectangular, tangentially elongated,  
thin-walled, cells; secondary cortex wide composed of polygonal, tangentially elongated  
cells, most of the cells containing both simple and compound starch grains consisting of  
2-3  components,  rounded  to  oval  in  shape,  3-11  µ in  dia.,  some  cells  containing  
yellowish-brown contents and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; stone cells found in  
single as well as in groups of varying shapes and size; secondary phloem a very wide  
zone, consisting of tangentially arranged fibres, alternating with sieve elements and  
phloem parenchyma traversed by phloem rays mostly straight, 1-2 seriate, consisting of  
82radially elongated, thin-waned cells towards inner region, tangentially elongated towards  
outer region; starch grains, and crystals similar to those of cortical cells, also present in  
phloem parenchyma and phloem rays; secondary xylem consisting of vessels, tracheids,  
fibres and parenchyma; vessels found scattered throughout secondary xylem region in  
singles or groups of 2-4 or rarely, more; fibres thick-walled arranged in tangential bands  
traversed by xylem rays; xylem parenchyma cells thin-walled, rounded to oval in shape;  
xylem rays uni to triseriate consisting of radially elongated cells; starch grains and  
calcium oxalate crystals are similar to those present in cortical cells and also found  
scattered in xylem parenchyma and xylem ray cells. 
Powder -Light yellow; shows fibres in singles or groups; xylem vessels entire or in  
pieces  with  reticulate  thickenings;  starch  grains  in  abundance  both  simple  and  
compound, consisting of 2-3 components, measuring 3-11  µ in dia., stone cells and a  
few prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     1    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Karanjin, Kanugin, Demethoxy-kanugin, Pongachromene &  
Tetra-O- Methylfisetin. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Ka¸·£ghna, Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¡tahara, ViÀaghna, Vra¸a¿odhana,  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Dh¡nvantara Gh¤ta. 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  DuÀ¶avra¸a,  K¤miroga,  KuÀ¶ha,  Prameha,  Yoniroga,  Ka¸·£,  
Ëntravidradh¢, Vidradh¢. 
DOSE  - 1-2 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
8337. Karanja (St.Bk.)  
KARAØJA (Stem Bark) 
Karaµja  consists of dried stem bark of  Pongamia pinnata  (Linn.) Merr., Syn.  P. 
glabra  Vent. (Fam. Fabaceae); a glabrous tree, upto 18 m or sometimes more in height,  
found almost throughout the country upto an altitude of 1200 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Gh¤takaraµja, Karaµjaka, Nakt¡hv¡, Naktam¡la 
Assamese:Korach 
Bengali:Dahara karanja, Karanja, Natakaranja 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Kanaji 
Hindi    :Karanj 
Kannada:Honge 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Pungu, Ungu 
Marathi:Karanja 
Oriya   :Karanja 
Punjabi:Karanj 
Tamil   :Pungai 
Telugu  :Ganuga, Kanuga 
Urdu    :Karanj 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark available in channelled, recurved, slightly quilled, usually 0.2-1 cm thick,  
lenticellate pieces, more or less smooth; outer surface ash-grey to greyish-brown and  
internal surface yellowish-white to cream coloured; fracture, short and fibrous, odour,  
unpleasant; taste, bitter.
b) Microscopic 
Bark - Shows 5-20 or more layers of cork, composed of rectangular, thick-walled cells,  
filled with reddish-brown content, at some places lenticels also appear; secondary cortex  
10-15  layered  having  oval  to  polygonal,  tangentially  elongated,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells; beneath secondary cortex a large group of oval to elongated stone  
cells, arranged in a tangential manner, forming a continuous or discontinuous band;  
secondary phloem composed of sieve elements, phloem parenchyma, phloem fibre and  
stone cells, traversed by medullary rays; sieve elements and parenchyma composed of  
rectangular  to polygonal  thin-walled cells, alternating  with  stone  cells;  fibre small,  
84polygonal, thin-walled and aseptate, a few associated with stone cells and arranged  
radially; medullary rays wavy, usually 2-4 cells wide, radially elongated and rounded to  
oval in shape, a few stone cells scattered in secondary cortex as in secondary phloem;  
rhomboidal crystals of calcium oxalate found in secondary cortex; starch grains simple,  
rounded to oval and compound having 2-4 components, present in secondary cortex,  
phloem parenchyma and rays cells; oil globules found in secondary phloem only. 
Powder -Yellowish-cream; shows groups of rectangular to polygonal, elongated, thin  
walled parenchymatous sieve tube; aseptate fibre and stone cells; rhomboidal crystals of  
calcium oxalate; rounded to oval, simple and compound starch grains, measuring 3-14 µ 
in dia, and rarely, oil globules. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   13   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     18   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Flavones and Furanoflavones like Karanjin, Pongapin, Demeth oxy-
kanugin, Kanugin, Pinnatin, Tetra-o-Methylfisetin, Gamatin, 5-
Methoxyfurano (2", 3" 7 : 8), flavone and 5-Methoxy-3'4' Methylene  
dioxyfurano (2", 3", 7 : 8) flavone & two new Furano compounds  
Glabra-I and Glabra-II. It also contains alkaloids and Triterpenoid  
saponin. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Ka¸·£ghna, Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¡tahara, ViÀaghma, Vra¸a¿odhana  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - B¤hanmaµjiÀh¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a, Must¡karaµj¡di Kv¡tha  
C£r¸a. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - DuÀ¶avra¸a, Ëntravidradh¢, K¤miroga, Ka¸·u, KuÀ¶ha, Prameha,  
Vidradh¢., Yoniroga 
DOSE  - 1-2 g. of the drug in powder form.  
   
85  
38. Karanja (Lf.)  
KARAØJA (Leaf) 
Karaµja consists of dried leaf of  Pongamia pinnata  (Linn.) Merr., Syn.  P. glabra 
Vent. (Fam. Fabaceae); a glabrous tree, upto 18 m or sometimes more in height, found  
almost throughout the country upto an altitude of 1200 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Gh¤takaraµja, Karaµjaka, Nakt¡hv¡, Naktam¡la 
Assamese:Korach 
Bengali:Dahara karanja, Karanja, Natakaranja 
English:Smooth leaved pongamia 
Gujrati  :Kanaji, Kanajo 
Hindi    :Karuaini, Dithouri 
Kannada:Honge, Hulagilu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Pungu, Ungu, Unu, Avittal 
Marathi:Karanja 
Oriya   :Karanja 
Punjabi:Karanj 
Tamil   :Pungai, Pongana 
Telugu  :Ganuga, Kanugu 
Urdu    :Karanj 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaves imparipinnate, leaflets 2-3 pairs, ovate or elliptic with smooth margins,  
6.2 - 11.5 cm long and 3.9-8.3 cm wide, dark green, petiolule short, 0.5-0.8 cm. 
b) Microscopic 
Leaf-
Petiolule - circular in outline, covered with cuticle, epidermis single layered, consistig of  
tabular cells; cortex consisting of angular, isodiametric, parenchymatous cells without  
intercellular  spaces,  a  few  cells  containing  prismatic  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  
pericyc1e present in the form of sclerenchymatous sheath; vascular bundle single, arc-
shaped, consisting of xylem and phloem; xylem vessels arranged radially, traversed by  
xylem rays; a few schizogenous cavities found scattered in cortex. 
86Mid rib - shows single layered epidermis, consisting of tabular cells, covered with thick  
cuticle, followed by 3-4 layered collenchymatous hypodermis; cortex consists of round  
to  oval,  thin-walled  parenchymatous  cells;  pericycle  present  in  the  form  of  
sclerenchymatous  sheath;  vascular  bundle,  collateral,  conjoint  and  arranged  in  
discontinuous  ring;  central  portion  occupied  by  oval  to  polygonal  thin-walled  
parenchymatous pith; prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate present in cortex, phloem and  
pith. 
Lamina  -shows  single  layered  epidermis  covered  with  thick  cuticle;  palisade  two  
layered; spongy parenchyma 3-5 layered, a few containing prismatic crystals similar to  
midrib, occasionally a few spongy parenchyma cells get elongated and look like palisade  
cells, palisade ratio 3.5-50; vein islet number 18-25 per mm square; stomata anisocytic,  
present in lower surface; stomatal index 12.5-20. 
Powder -Green; shows spiral xylem vessels, mesophyll cells, epidermal cells and a few  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   3.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     16   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - A new Furanoflavone -3' - methoxy pongapin in addition to  
Karanjin, Kanjone and its two isomers 7-Methoxyfurano-(4",5",6,5)  
- flavone and 8-Methoxyfurano-(4", 5", - 6, 5)-flavone and 8  
methoxyfurano- (4", 5" - 6, 7) -flavone. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Bhedana, Kaphahara, V¡tahara, Pittavardhaka, Ka¸·ughna, K¤imihara,  
áothahara 
 
87IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - J¡ty¡di Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - K¤miroga, KuÀ¶ha, Vra¸a, Ka¸·au. 
DOSE  - For external use only.  
   
  
8839. Karavallaka (Fresh.Fr.)  
KËRAVALLAKA (Fresh Fruit) 
K¡ravallaka  consists  of  fresh  fruit  of  Momordica  charantia  Linn.  (Fam. 
Cucurbitaceae);  a  monoecious  climber  found  throughout  the  country  often  under  
cultivation, upto an altitude of 1500 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:K¡ravella, Kathilla, Varivall¢, K¡ravall¢. 
Assamese:Kakiral, Kakral 
Bengali:Karolla 
English:Bitter gourd 
Gujrati  :Karela 
Hindi    :Karela 
Kannada:Hagalakai 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kaippa, Pavackkai 
Marathi:Karla 
Oriya   :Kalara, Salara 
Punjabi:Karela 
Tamil   :Paharkai 
Telugu  :Kaakara Kaaya 
Urdu    :Karela 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit 2.5 - 25 cm long, oblong, pendulous, fusiform, usually pointed or beaked,  
ribbed and bearing numerous triangular tubercles, 3 valved at the apex when mature,  
surface  rough;  light  green  to  green  in  colour  containing  numerous  seeds;  taste,  
extremely bitter.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                                                     Nil   Appendix    2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.6  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     28   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
89T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform:  
Methanol (90 : 10) shows under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.23 (red),  
0.61 (light sky blue), 0.96 (sky blue), 0.98 (red & sky blue). On exposure to Iodine  
vapour four spots appear at Rf. 0.17, 0.46, 0.67 and 0.98 (all yellow). On spraying with  
5% Methanolic Phosphomolybdic acid reagent nine spots appear at Rf. 0.03, 0.16, 0.34,  
0.43, 0.50, 0.60, 0.75, 0.81 and 0.98 (all blue).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloid (Momoridicine) and Glycosides. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Bhedi, D¢pana, H¤dya, Kaphahara, V¡tahara, RaktadoÀahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Mah¡viÀagarbha Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áv¡sa, Jvara, K¡mal¡, K¡sa, K¤miroga, KuÀ¶ha, P¡¸·u, Prameha,  
Raktavik¡ra, Aruci. 
DOSE  - 10 - 15 ml. juice of fresh drug. 
   
  
9040. Katuka (Rz.)  
KAÙUKË (Rhizome)  
Kauk¡ consists of the dried rhizome with root of Picrorhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth. 
(Fam. Scrophulariaceae); a perennial,  more or less hairy herb common on the north-
western Himalayas from Kashmir to Sikkim. Rhizome is cut into small pieces. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Tikt¡, Tiktarohi¸¢, Kaurohi¸¢, Kav¢, Sutiktaka, Kauka, Rohi¸¢. 
Assamese:Katki, Kutki 
Bengali:-- 
English:Hellebore 
Gujrati  :Kadu, Katu 
Hindi    :Kutki 
Kannada:Katuka rohini, katuka rohini 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kaduk rohini, Katuka rohini 
Marathi:Kutki, Kalikutki 
Oriya   :Katuki 
Punjabi:Karru, kaur 
Tamil   :Katuka rohini, Katuku rohini, Kadugurohini 
Telugu  :Karukarohini 
Urdu    :Kutki 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Rhizome - 2.5-8 cm long and 4-8 mm thick, subcylindrical, straight or slightly curved,  
externally greyish-brown, surface rough due to longitudinal wrinkles, circular scars of  
roots and bud scales and sometimes roots attached, tip ends in a growing bud surrounded  
by tufted crown of leaves, at places cork exfoliates exposing dark cortex; fracture, short;  
odour, pleasant; taste, bitter. . 
Root  - Thin, cylindrical, 5-10 cm long, 0.05-0.1 cm in diameter, straight or slightly  
curved with a few longitudinal wrinkles and dotted scars, mostly attached with rhizomes,  
dusty grey, fracture, short, inner surface black with whitish xylem; odour, pleasant;  
taste, bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Rhizome - Shows 20-25 layers of cork consisting of tangentially elongated, suberised  
cells; cork cambium 1-2 layered; cortex single layered or absent, primary cortex persists  
91in some cases, one or two small vascular bundles present in cortex; vascular bundles  
surrounded  by  single  layered  endodermis  of  thick-walled  cells;  secondary  phloem  
composed of phloem parenchyma and a few scattered fibres; cambium 2-4 layered;  
secondary xylem consists of vessels, tracheids, xylem fibres and xylem parenchyma,  
vessels vary in shape and size having transverse oblique articulation; tracheids long,  
thick-walled,  lignified,  more  or  less  cylindrical  with  blunt  tapering  ends;  xylem  
parenchyma  thin-walled  and  polygonal  in  shape;  centre  occupied  by  a  small  pith  
consisting of thin-walled cells; simple round to oval, starch grains, measuring 25-104 µ 
in dia., abundantly found in all cells. 
Root -Young  root  shows  single  layered  epidermis,  some  epidermal  cells  elongate  
forming unicellular hairs; hypodermis single layered; cortex 8-14 layered; consisting of  
oval to polygonal, thick-walled, parenchymatous cells; primary stele tetrach to heptarch,  
enclosed  by  single  layered  pericycle  and  single  layered,  thick-walled  cells  of  
endodermis;  mature  root  shows  4-15  layers  of  cork,  1-2  layers  of  cork  cambium;  
secondary phloem poorly developed; secondary xylem consisting of vessels, tracheids,  
parenchyma and fibres; vessels have varying shape and size, some cylindrical with tail-
like, tapering ends, some drum shaped with perforation on end walls or lateral walls;  
tracheids cylindrical with tapering pointed ends; fibres aseptate, thick-walled, lignified  
with tapering blunt chisel-like pointed ends. 
Powder -  Dusty  grey;  shows  groups  of  fragments  of  cork  cells,  thick-walled,  
parenchyma, pitted vessels and aseptate fibres, simple round to oval, starch grains,  
measuring 25 - 104 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform:  
Methanol (95 : 5) shows under U.V. light (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.05  
(blue), 0.30 (blue) and 0.35 (green). On exposure to Iodine vapour nine spots appear at  
Rf. 0.10, 0.17, 0.21, 0.30, 0.37, 0.41, 0.62, 0.72 and 0.84 (all yellow). On spraying with  
5% methanolic sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at  
105°C seven spots appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.10, 0.17, 0.21, 0.30, 0.41 and 0.84 (all brownish  
grey). 
92 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glucoside (Picrorhizin).
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :H¤dya, Pittahara, D¢pan¢, Bhedin¢, Jvarahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Ërogyavardhini Gu¶ik¡, Tiktaka Gh¤ta, Sarvajvarahara  
Lauha, Mah¡tikataka Gh¤ta. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áv¡sa, D¡ha, Jvara, K¡mal¡, KuÀ¶ha, ViÀamajvara, Arocaka. 
DOSE  - 1 - 3 g. of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
9341. Kokilaksha (W.P.)  
KOKILËKâË (Whole Plant) 
Kokil¡kÀ¡  consists of  dried whole plant of  Asteracantha longifolla  Nees.  Syn. 
Hygrophila spinosa T .Anders (Fam.Acanthaceae); a spiny, stout, annual herb, common in  
water logged places throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:IkÀura, IkÀuraka, Kokil¡kÀ¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Kuliyakhara, Kulekhade 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Ekharo 
Hindi    :Talmakhana 
Kannada:Kolavali, Kolarind, Kolavankal 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:--, Culli, Nirchulli, Vayalculli 
Marathi:Talikhana, Kalsunda 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Golmidi, Kettu, Nirguvireru, Nerugobbi 
Telugu  :-- 
Urdu    :Talmakhana 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Mostly adventitious, whitish to brown; no characteristic odour and taste. 
Stem - Usually unbranched, fasciculate, sub-quadrangular, swollen at nodes, covered  
with long hairs which are numerous at the nodes, externally greyish-brown, creamish -
brown in cut surfaces; no characteristic odour and taste. 
Leaf - Greenish-brown, 1-7 cm long, 0.5-1 cm wide, subsessile, lanceolate, acute, entire  
and hairy. 
Flower - Yellowish-brown, usually occurring in apparent whorls of eight (in 4 pairs) at  
each node; bracts about 2.5 cm long, with long white hairs; calyx 4-partite, upper sepal  
1.6-2 cm long, broader than the other three, which are 1.3 cm long, all linear-lanceolate,  
coarsely hairy on the back and with hyaline ciliate margins; corolla 3.2 cm long, widely  
2 lipped, tube 1.6 cm long, abruptly swollen at top; stamens 4, didynamous, second pair  
94larger; filament quite glabrous; anthers two celled, subequal, glabrous; ovary two celled  
with 4 ovules in each cell; style filiform, pubescent; stigma simple, involute with a  
fissure on upper side. 
Fruit - Two celled, linear-oblong, compressed, capsule about 0.8 cm long, pointed, 4-
seeded.
Seed - Ovate, flat or compressed, truncate at the base, 0.2-0.25 cm  long and 0.1 - 0.15  
cm  wide, hairy but appearing smooth; when soaked in water immediately get coated  
with mucilage, light brown; taste slightly bitter and odour not distinct. 
b) Microscopic 
Root  - Root shows a single layered epidermis of thin-walled, rectangular to cubical,  
parenchymatous cells having unicellular hairs; secondary cortex composed of round to  
oval or oblong, thin-walled cells having large intercellular spaces; most of these cells  
divided longitudinally and transversely with walls forming 4-6 or more chambers; size  
of these cells and intercellular spaces gradually reduce towards the inner region, where  
these cells are mostly radially elongated, arranged in radial rows, a few thick-walled  
cells found scattered singly  throughout secondary cortex; secondary phloem  narrow  
consisting of small, thin-walled, polygonal cells; phloem fibres thick-walled, occur in  
groups of 2-6 or singles, scattered throughout the phloem region; secondary xylem forms  
continuous ring; vessels angular, broader towards centre, arranged radially having spiral  
thickenings,  surrounded  by  thick-walled  parenchyma  and  xylem  fibres;  fibre  walls  
uniformly thickened; multi and uniseriate medullary rays occur from primary xylem  
region upto secondary cortex; ray cells thin walled, radially elongated in xylem region,  
circular to transversely elongated in phloem region. 
Stem  -  Shows  somewhat  sub-quadrangular  outline;  cork  consists  of  5-10  rows  of  
rectangular, radially arranged, moderately thick-walled, brownish cells; collenchyma 4-8  
layered  consisting  of  isodiametric  cells;  a  few  thick-walled,  isolated  cells  found  
scattered in this zone; cortical cells thin-walled, round, oblong, variable in size, with a  
number of large air cavities; a special feature of these cells is the formation of tangential  
and radial walls within the cell dividing it into 4-5 or more parts; most of cells contain  
numerous acicular crystals of calcium oxalate; endodermis single layered, composed of  
transversely  elongate,  thin-walled  cells;  phloem  narrow,  consisting  of  round  to  
polygonal cells, peripheral ones larger, inner cells smaller; fibres thick-walled, single or  
in groups of 2-3, some cells contain calcium oxalate crystals similar to those found in  
cortical cells; xylem present in a ring; vessels with spiral thickenings, arranged radially;  
fibres elongated with wide lumen and pointed tips, medullary rays uni to multi seriate  
extend upto secondary cortex; ray cells thin-walled, radially elongated in secondary  
xylem, transversely elongated in secondary phloem; pith large, composed of polygonal,  
thin-walled parenchymatous cells, having small intercellular spaces; a few cells contain  
calcium oxalate crystals similar to those found in secondary cortex. 
95Leaf-
Midrib - Shows concavo-convex outline; epidermis on either surface covered with thick  
cuticle; collenchyma 2-5 layered; stele composed of small strands of xylem and phloem  
having some groups of fibre; rest of tissues composed of thin-walled, parenchymatous  
cells, a few of them containing acicular crystals of calcium oxalate ; cystolith present  
beneath upper and above the lower epidermal cells. 
Lamina  - Shows epidermis single layered on either surface, composed of thin-walled,  
parenchymatous,  tangentially  elongated  cells,  covered  with  thick  cuticle;  stomata  
diacytic,  1-5  celled  hairs  present  on  both  surfaces;  palisade  1-2  layered;  spongy  
parenchyma composed of 3-5 layered, loosely arranged cells traversed by a number of  
veins; palisade ratio 6.25-15.75; stomatal index 17.24-30.78; vein islet number 17-42. 
Fruit - Shows single layered epidermis covered with striated cuticle followed by 5-10  
layered, thick-walled, oval to hexagonal, lignified, sclerenchymatous cells. 
Seed - Shows hairy testa composed of thin-walled, tangentially elongated cells covered  
with  pigmented  cuticle;  embryo  composed  of  oval  to  polygonal,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells containing oil globules. 
Powder - Light brown; shows aseptate, elongated fibres; vessels with simple pits and  
spiral thickening; palisade, acicular crystals of calcium oxalate, unicellular hairs and  
globules.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   9    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, Tikta 
Guna :Picchila, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya, M£trala, Rucya, V¡jikara, V¤Àya, Santarpa¸a 
 
96IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - P¡naviral¡di Bhasma (KÀ¡ra). 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - T¤À¸¡, Ëmav¡ta áotha, V¡tarakta. 
DOSE  - 3 -6 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
9742. Kokilaksha (Rt.)  
KOKILËKâË (Root) 
Kokil¡kÀ¡ consists of dried root of Asteracantha longifolia Nees. Syn. Hygrophila 
spinosa T.  Anders (Fam.Acanthaceae); a spiny,  stout, annual herb, common in  water  
logged places throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:IkÀura, IkÀuraka, Kokil¡kÀ¢, Culli 
Assamese:--, Kulekhara 
Bengali:-- 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Ekharo 
Hindi    :Talmakhana 
Kannada:Nirmulli, Kolavulike, Kolavankae 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Vayalculli, Nirchulli 
Marathi:Talimakhana 
Oriya   :Koillekha, Koilrekha 
Punjabi:--- 
Tamil   :Nirmulle 
Telugu  :Talmakhana, Nerugobbi, Golmidi 
Urdu    :Talmakhana 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Roots  mostly  adventitions,  branches  on  nodes,  whitish  to  brownish;  no  
characteristic odour and taste. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Root-Appears circular in outline, epidermis consists of rectangular to cubical, thin-
walled cells; a few epidermal cells elongated to form unicellular hairs, below epidermis  
3-4  compactly  arranged  rows  of  thin-walled  polygonal  cells  of  secondary  cortex;  
secodnary  cortex  composed  of-rounded  to  oval  or  oblong,  thin-walled  cells  having  
conspicuously large intercellular spaces, most of these cells divided longitudinally and  
transversely with walls forming 4-6 or more chambers, the size of these cells, and the  
intercellular spaces gradually reduce towards inner region of secondary cortex; a few  
thick-walled cells found scattered singly throughout secondary cortex, inner most row of  
thin-walled cells of secodnary cortex comparatively smaller in size, slightly transversely  
elongated; secondary phloem narrow, consisting of small, thin-walled, polygonal cells,  
98phloem fibres thick-walled occur in groups or as single cells, scattered throughout the  
phloem region, each group composed of 2-6 cells; secondary xylem forms continuous  
ring; xylem vessels usually arranged in radial rows, angular, broader towards centre,  
having  spiral thickening,  surrounded  by thick-walled xylem  parenchyma and xylem  
fibres; fibre walls uniformly thickened; multiseriate medullary rays occur from primary  
xylem region upto secondary cortex; uniseriate rays also present in xylem and extend  
upto the secondary cortex; ray cells thin-walled, radially elongated in the xylem region,  
rounded to transversely elongated in phloem region. 
Powder - Light brown to ash coloured; shows fragments of pitted, lignified fibres;  
vessels with spiral thickening, unicellular hairs and a few groups of parenchymatous  
cells. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   12   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential oil
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, Tikta 
Guna :Picchila, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Kaphahara, M£trala, V¡tahara, V¤Àya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - R¡snaira¸·¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a, Vastyamay¡ntaka Gh¤ta. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Ëmav¡ta áotha, A¿ma¤¢, V¡tarakta, Pittatis¡ra 
DOSE  - 3 -6 g. of the drug for decoction. 
   
  
9943. Kokilaksha (Sd.)  
KOKILËKâË (Seed) 
Kokil¡kÀ¡ consists of dried seed of Asteracantha longifolia Nees. Syn. Hygrophila 
spinosa T. Anders. (Fam. Acanthaceae); a spiny, stout, annual herb, common in water  
logged places throughout the country.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:IkÀura, IkÀuraka, Kokil¡kÀ¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Daruharidra 
English:Indian Berberry 
Gujrati  :Daruharidra, Daruhuladur 
Hindi    :Darhald, Daruhaldi 
Kannada:Daruhaladi, Maradarishana, Maradarishina 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Maramannal, Maramanjnal 
Marathi:Daruhalad 
Oriya   :Daruhalidi, Daruharidra 
Punjabi:Sumalu 
Tamil   :Gangeti, Varatiu manjal 
Telugu  :Manupasupu 
Urdu    :Darhald 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Ovate, flat or compressed, truncate at the base, 2-3 mm long and 1-2 mm wide,  
white, hairy but appearing smooth, when soaked in water immediately get coated with  
mucilage, light yellowish-brown; taste, slightly bitter and odour not distinct. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Seed - Shows hairy testa composed of thin-walled, tangentially elongated cells covered  
externally with pigmented cuticle layer; embryo composed of oval to polygonal, thin-
walled, parenchymatous cells; oil globules present in this region. 
Powder - Greyish-brown; shows hairs and oil globules.
Swelling Index - 8 -10.
Introduce the accurately weighed seeds into a 25 ml glass-stoppered measuring  
cylinder. The length of the graduated portion of the cylinder should be 125 mm; the  
100internal diameter 16 mm subdivided in 0.2 ml and marked from 0 to 25 ml in upwards  
direction. Add 25 ml of water, and shake the mixture thoroughly at intervals of every 10  
minutes for 1 hour. Allow to stand for 3 hours at room temperature. Measure the volume  
in ml occupied by the seeds, including any sticky mucilage. Carry out simultaneously  
not  less  than  3  determination  and  calculate  the  mean  value  of  the  individual  
determinations, related to 1 g of seeds. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   15   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene:  
Ethylacetate (95 : 5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) five fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.24 (red),  
0.41 (light blue), 0.55 (light blue), 0.76 (sky blue) and 0.93 (sky blue). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.03, 0.17, 0.24, 0.31, 0.38, 0.52 and 0.72 (all  
yellow). On spraying with 5% Ethanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and on heating the plate  
for fifteen minutes at 105 ° C eight spots appear at Rf. 0.03 (light brown), 0.10 (light  
brown), 0.17 (light brown), 0.24 (dark brown), 0.31 (dark brown), 0.38 (light brown),  
0.52 (dark brown) and 0.72 (dark brown).
CONSTITUENTS  -  An yellow semi-drying oil, enzymes like Diastase, Lipase, Protease  
and an Alkaloid.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Picchila, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya, Kaphahara, Santarpa¸a, V¤Àya, Ruchya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Vastyamay¡ntaka Gh¤ta., Yak¤t áulavin¡¿in¢ Va¶ik¡ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áotha, V¡tarakta, Pitt¡¿mar¢. 
DOSE  - 3 -6 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
101  44. Kuzuppa (W.P)  
KOZUPPË (Whole Plant) 
Kozupp¡   consists  of  dried  whole  plant  of  Portulaca  oleracea  Linn.  (Fam. 
Portulacaceae); an annual succulent, prostrate herb, 50 cm long, found throughout the  
country, ascending upto an altitude of 1500 m in the Himalayas. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Lonik¡, Loni, Gho¶ik¡. 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Baraloniya, Badanuni, Baranunia 
English:Garden Purslane, Common Indian Purslane 
Gujrati  :Luni, Loni, Moti Luni 
Hindi    :Khursa, Kulfa, Badi Lona 
Kannada:Dudagorai, Doddagoni Soppu, Lonika, Loni 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Koricchira, Kozhuppa, Kozuppa, Kozuppaccira 
Marathi:Kurfah, Ghola 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Lonak, Chhotalunia, Khurfa, Kwfa 
Tamil   :Pasalai, Pulikkirai, Paruppukkeerai, Kozhuppu 
Telugu  :Pappukura, Peddapavila Kura, Payilikura, Pavilikura 
Urdu    :Khurfa 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Cylindrical, small, oblique, surface smooth, brownish-grey; secondary roots, less  
in number, root hairs abundant in upper region, fracture, short. 
Stem - Almost cylindrical, swollen at the nodes, ribbed, branched, 0.1 to 0.2 cm in  
diameter, fracture, short; odour, characteristic. 
Leaf - Simple, sub-sessile, cuneiform, rounded and truncate at the apex; 0.3 to 2.5 cm  
long and 0.1 to 0.6 cm wide, oblong, spathulate, smooth and greenish-brown. 
Flower - A few, bright yellow, at terminal heads, sometimes in axillary clusters of 2-6,  
subtended by an involucre, 3-4 leaves; sepal 0.25-0.4 cm long; petals obovate, 0.5 cm  
long, very delicate and soon falling off; stamens 8-12; style 5-6 fid, 0.35-0.4 cm long. 
Fruit - An ovoid capsule, 0.3 cm long, dehiscing above the base. 
102Seed -Numerous, reniform, black, minute, 0.06-0.07 cm across, dark brown. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Root  -  Shows  5-15  layers  of  cork,  inner  half  filled  with  reddish-brown  contents;  
secondary  cortex  composed  of  thin-walled,  oval  cells,  having  intercellular  spaces;  
pericycle  fibre  present  in  patches;  secondary  phloem  consists  of  sieve  tubes  and  
parenchymatous cells; secondary xylem composed of vessels, tracheids and parenchyma;  
vessels, solitary or in groups of 2-5, arranged in radial rows, having simple pits and  
spiral  thickening;  tracheids,  thick-walled  with  wide  lumen;  parenchyma  abundant;  
simple  as  well  as  compound  starch  grains  measuring  6-14  µ in  dia.,  having  2-3  
components present in secondary cortex, phloem, xylem parenchyma and ray cells. 
Stem - Wavy in outline, shows 5-10 layers of thin walled cork, with reddish-brown  
content in a few cells; secondary cortex consists of 2-3 layers of collenchymatous and  
3-4 layers of parenchymatous cells with intercellular spaces; pericycle present as patches  
of pericyclic fibres; secondary phloem mostly composed of sieve tubes and parenchyma  
cells; secondary xylem consists of vessels, tracheids and parenchyma; vassels having  
simple pits and spiral thickening; tracheids thick-walled with wide lumen; parenchyma  
abundant and thick-walled; rosette crystals of calcium oxalate and starch grains present  
in secodnary cortex, phloem and xylem parenchyma, ray cells and pith. 
Leaf-
Midrib - shows a collateral vascular bundle surrounded by a sheath of palisade cells; rest  
of the tissues between vascular bundle and epidermal cells composed of thin walled,  
oval, parenchymatous cells; stomata paracytic type; rosette crystals of calcium oxalate  
and starch grains simple, as well as compound, measuring 6-14 µ  , present in mesophyll  
cells. 
Lamina - shows a single layered upper and lower epidermis, covered externally with a  
thick cuticle; paracytic stomata present on both surfaces; palisade single layered; spongy  
parenchyma cells more or less isodiametric and loosely arranged. 
Powder  -  Greyish-brown;  shows  groups  of  oval  to  polygonal,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells, pitted and spiral vessels, fragments of cork cells, rosette crystals  
of calcium oxalate and starch grains, simple as well as compound, measuring 6-14 µ in 
dia. having 2-3 components. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 Foreign matter                          Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   30   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     19   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
103 T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica Gel 'G' plate using Toluene :  
Ethylacetate (9:1) shows six spots at Rf. 0.08, 0.10, (both green), 0.41, 0.52 (both faint  
green),  0.68  (yellow)  and  0.76  (green)  in  visible  light.  Under  U.V.  (366  nm)  six  
fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.08, 0.10, 0.41, 0.52, 0.68 and 0.76 (all pinkish red).  
On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.50, 0.61, 0.68, 0.76 and  
0.98 (all yellow)
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Protein, Carbohydrates, Vitamin C and Mucilage
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Amla 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa, Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Amla 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittakara, V¡tahara, CakÀuÀya, V¡¸¢doÀahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Marma Gu¶ik¡. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Agnim¡ndya., áotha, Ar¿a, Gulma, Prameha, Vra¸a 
DOSE  - 3 - 6 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
10445. Lajjalu (W.P)  
LAJJËLU (Whole Plant) 
Lajj¡lu consists of dried whole plant of Mimosa pudica Linn. (Fam. Fabaceae); a  
diffused undershrub, sensitive to touch, 25-50 cm high, found nearly throught hotter and  
moist regions of the country.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:SaÆang¡, Var¡kr¡nt¡, Namask¡r¢ 
Assamese:Lajubilata, Adamalati 
Bengali:Lajaka, Lajjavanti 
English:Touch-me-not 
Gujrati  :Risamani, Lajavanti, Lajamani 
Hindi    :Chhuimui, Lajauni 
Kannada:Muttidasenui, Machikegida, Lajjavati 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Thotta Vati 
Marathi:Lajalu 
Oriya   :Lajakuri 
Punjabi:Lajan 
Tamil   :Thottavadi, Tottalchurungi 
Telugu  :Mudugudamara 
Urdu    :Chhuimui 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Cylindrical, tapering, rependant , with secondary and tertiary branches, varying in  
length, upto 2 cm thick, surface more or less rough or longitudinally wrinkled; greyish  
brown to brown, cut surface of pieces pale yellow; fracture hard, woody, bark fibrous;  
odour, distinct; taste, slightly astringent. 
Stem - Cylindrical, upto 2.5 cm in dia; sparsely prickly, covered with long,week bristles  
longitudinally grooved, external surface light brown, internal cut surface grey, bark  
fibrous; easily separable from wood. 
Leaf - Digitately compound with one or two pairs of sessile, hairy pinnae, alternate,  
petiolate, stipulate, linear lanceolate; leaflets 10-20 pairs, 0.6-1.2 cm long, 0.3-0.4 cm  
broad, sessile, obliquely narrow or linear oblong; obliquely rounded at base, acute,  
nearly glabrous; yellowish-green. 
105Flower - Pink, in globose head, peduncles prickly; calyx very small; corolla pink, lobes  
4, ovate oblong; stamens 4, much exserted; ovary sessile; ovules numerous. 
Fruit  -  Lomentum,  simple,  dry,  1-1.6  cm  long,  0.4-0.5  cm  broad  with  indehisced  
segments and persistent sutures having 2-5 seeds with yellowish, spreading bristle at  
sutures, 0.3 cm long, glabrous, straw coloured. 
Seed - Compressed, oval-elliptic, brown to grey, 0.3 long, 2.5 mm broad having a central  
ring on each face. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Root - Mature root shows cork 5-12 layered, tangentially elongated cells, a few outer  
layers crushed or exfoliated; secondary cortex consisting of 6-10 layered, tangentially  
elongated thin-walled cells; secondary phloem compossed of sieves elements, fibres,  
crystal fibres and phloem parenchyma traversed by phloem rays, phloem fibres single or  
in groups, arranged in tangential bands; crystal fibres thick-walled, 3-25 chambered,  
each  with  single  or  2-4  prismatic  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  phloem  rays  uni  to  
multiseriate, 2-3 seriate more common; secondary xylem consists of usual elements  
traversed by xylem rays; vessels scattered throughout secondary xylem having bordered  
pits and reticulate thickenings; crystal fibres containing one or rarely 2-4 prismatic  
crystals  of  calcium  oxalate  in  each  chamber;  parenchyma,  thick-walled,  scattered  
throughout secondary xylem; xylem rays uni to bi-seriate, rarely multiseriate, wider  
towards secondary phloem and narrower towards centre; starch grains, prismatic crystals  
of calcium oxalate and tannin present in secondary cortex, phloem and xylem rays and  
parenchyma; starch grains both simple and compound having 2-3 components, rounded  
to oval measuring 6-20 µ and 16-28  µ in dia. respectively. 
Stem - Mature stem shows 4-8 layered, exfoliated cork of tangentially elongated cells  
filled  with  reddish-brown  contents;  secondary  cortex  wide,  consisting  of  large,  
moderately thick-walled, tangentially elongated to oval, parenchymatous cells, filled  
with  reddish-brown  contents,  a  few  cells  containing  prismatic  crystals  of  calcium  
oxalate,  a  number  of  lignified,  fibres  single  or  in  groups,  scattered  throughout;  
secondary phloem consisting of usual elements, 2-5 transversely arranged strips of fibres  
occur alternating with narrow strips of sieve elements and parenchyma, crystal fibres  
elongated, thick-walled, containing single crystal of calcium oxalate in each chamber;  
phloem  rays  thick-walled,  radially  elongated;  secondary  xylem  composed  of  usual  
elements  traversed  by  xylem  rays;  vessels  drum-shaped  with  spiral  thickenings,  
tracheids pitted with pointed ends, fibres of two types, shorter with wide lumen and  
longer with narrow lumen; xylem rays radially elongated, thick-walled, 1-6 cells wide  
and 3-30 cells high; pith consisting of polygonal, parenchymatous cells with intercellular  
spaces. 
106Leaf-
Petiole - shows single layered epidermis with thick cuticle; cortex 4-7 layered of thin  
walled, parenchymatous cells; pericycle arranged in a ring; 4 central vascular bundles  
present with two smaller vascular bundles arranged laterally, one in each wing. 
Midrib  - shows single layered epidermis, covered with thin-cuticle; upper epidermis  
followed by a single layered palisade, spongy parenchyma single layered, pericycle same  
as in petiole; vascular bundle single. 
Lamina  -  shows  epidermis  on  both  surfaces,  palisade  single  layered;  spongy  
parenchyma, 3-5 layers consisting of circular cells; rosette crystals and a few veins  
present in spongy parenchyma. 
Fruit  - Shows single layered epidermis with a few non-glandular, branched, shaggy  
hairs; mesocarp of 5-6 layers of thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; some amphicribral  
vascular bundles found scattered in this region; endocarp of thick-walled, lignified cells  
followed by single layered, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells 
Seed - Shows single layered radially elongated cells; followed by 5-6 layered angular  
cells filled with dark brown contents; endosperm consists of angular or elongated cells, a  
few containing prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; cotyledons consists of thin-walled  
cells, a few cells containing rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; embryo straight with  
short and thick radicle. 
Powder - Reddish-brown; shows, reticulate, pitted vessels, prismatic and rosette crystals  
of calcium oxalate, fibres, crystal fibres, yellow or brown parenchymatous cells, palisade  
cells  non  glandular,  branched,  shaggy  hairs,  single  and  compound  starch  grains,  
measuring 6-25  µ in dia. with 2 - 3 components 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica Gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol :  
Acetic acid: Water: (4:1:5) Under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones appear at Rf.  
0.35, 0.62, 0.69 (all blue) and 0.81 (bluish-pink). On exposure to Iodine vapour two  
107spots appear at Rf. 0.35 and 0.94 (both yellow) On spraying with Dragendorff reagent  
followed by 5% Methanolic Sulphuric acid reagent one spot appears at Rf. 0.35 (orange).  
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloid
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Gr¡h¢, Kaphahara, Pittahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Sama´g¡di C£r¸a, Ku¶aj¡valeha, PuÀy¡nuga C£r¸a, B
¤hat Gang¡dhara C£r¸a. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áopha, Atis¡ra, áv¡sa, D¡ha, KuÀ¶ha, Vra¸a, Yoniroga, Raktapita 
DOSE  - 10-20 g of the drug for decoction. 
   
  
10846. Madhuka (Fl.)  
MADHÍKA  (Flower) 
Madh£ka consists of flower usually without stalk or calyx of  Madhuca indica 
J.F.Gmel. Syn. M.  latifolia (Roxb.) Macbride, Bassia latifolia Roxb. (Fam. Sapotaceae) ; a  
medium sized deciduous tree occurs in mixed deciduous forests throughout India, and also  
cultivated. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Gu·apuÀp¡ 
Assamese:Mahua, Mahuwa 
Bengali:Mahuwa 
English:The Indian Butter tree, Mahawash tree 
Gujrati  :Mahudo, Mahuwa 
Hindi    :Mahuwa 
Kannada:Hippegida, Halippe, Hippe, Hippenara, Madhuka, Ippa, Eppimara 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Irippa, Ilippa, Iluppa, Eluppa 
Marathi:Mohda 
Oriya   :Mahula 
Punjabi:Maua, Mahua 
Tamil   :Katiluppai, Kattu Iluppai, Iluppi 
Telugu  :lppa Puvvu 
Urdu    :Mahuva 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug consists of mostly corolla and androecium; corolla fleshy, reddish-brown,  
tabular, lobes 7-14 (usually 8-9), ovate lanceolate, short, erect 0.5-2 cm long; stamen  
20-30  (usually  24-26),  epipetalous  and  arranged  in  two  series;  anther  sub-sessile,  
epipetalous, basifixed, lanceolate, pointed at tip and hairy at the back with prominent  
dark brown connective strand; taste, sweet. 
b) Microscopic 
Corolla - Petal shows a single layered epidermis, followed by thin-walled, irregularly  
shaped  parenchymatous  cells;  vascular  bundles  found  scattered  in  parenchymatous  
tissues. 
Androecium - Anther shows 4 pollen chambers and prominent cells of connective tissue  
in the centre of the chambers; epidermis single layered covered with thin cuticle; a few  
109unicellular hairs present on one side; endothecium composed of radially elongated, oval  
shaped, lignified cells; tapetum not distinct; pollen grains single or in groups, spherical,  
with clear exine and intine walls scattered in the pollen sac, a few cells of the vascular  
bundles are seen embedded in the connective tissues. 
Powder - Dark brown; shows fragments of epidermal cells, unicellular hairs; round,  
brown pollen grains with clear exine and intine walls. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     25   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     70   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Moisture content                        Not more than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.9 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sugars
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :áukrala, Balya, Pittakara, V¡tahara, áramahara, Ah¤dya. 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Madh£k¡sava, Dr¡kaÀ¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a, El¡di Modaka.  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áv¡sa, D¡ha, KÀata, KÀaya, T¤À¸¡, árama 
DOSE  - 10 - 15 g. of the drug.  
   
  
11047. Matshyakshi (W.P.)  
MATSYËKâÌ (Whole Plant)  
Matsy¡kÀ¢ consists of dried whole plant of  Alternanthera sessilis  (Linn.) R. Br., 
Syn,  A.  triandra  Lam.,  A.  denticulata  R. Br.,  A. nodiflora  R. Br., A. repens Gmel., non  
Link. (Fam. Amaranthaceae); a small prostrate or ascending herb with several spreading  
branches growing throughout the warmer parts ofthe country and frequently found in wet  
places especially around tanks and ponds.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Matsyagandh¡, Bahli, Matsy¡duni, Gandal¢, Gartkalambuk¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Sanchesak, Salincha Sak 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Jalajambo 
Hindi    :Gudari Sag 
Kannada:Honagonne soppu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kozuppa, Ponnankanni 
Marathi:Kanchari 
Oriya   :Matsagandha, Salincha Saaga 
Punjabi:--- 
Tamil   :Ponnangkanni 
Telugu  :Ponnaganti Koora 
Urdu    :----- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Cylindrical, 0.1-0.6 cm diameter, cream to grey, numerous roots arising from the  
main tap root as lateral rootlets; fracture, short; no characteristic odour and taste. 
Stem  -  Herbaceous,  weak,  mostly  cylindrical  occasionally  sub-quadrangular  at  the  
apical region, with spreading branches from the base; yellowish-brown to light-brown;  
nodes and internodes distinct, internodes 0.5-5 cm long, often rooting at lower nodes;  
fracture, short; no characteristic odour and taste. 
Leaf - 1.3-7.5 cm long, 0.3-2 cm wide, sometimes reaching 10 cm long, 2.5 cm wide,  
sessile, linear-oblong, or elliptic, obtuse or subacute; no characteristic odour and taste. 
Flower - Flower in small axillary sessile heads, white often tinged with pink, bracteoles  
1111.2 cm long, ovate, scarious; perianth 2.5-3 mm long, sepals ovate, acute, thin, ovary  
obcordate, compressed, style very short, capitellate; no characteristic odour and taste.
Fruit  -  Utricle,  1.5  mm  long,  orbicular,  compressed  with  thickened  margins;  no  
characteristic odour and taste. 
b) Microscopic 
Root  -  Shows  circular  outline  consisting  of  5-7  layered,  thin-walled  tangentially  
elongated and squarish, radially arranged cork cells; secondary cortex narrow, consistig  
of thin-walled, round or oval, parenchymatous cells; vascualr bundles radially arranged,  
numerous, consisting of thin-walled cells; xylem tissues lignified; conjunctive tissue  
between  bundles  consisting  of  oval,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells;  anomalous  
secondary growth occurs in the form of succession of rings of vascular bundles which  
are bicollateral, open and exarch; in the pith there are two larger vascular bundles  
composed  of  xylem  and  phloem;  pith  consisting  of  thin-walled,  round  to  oval,  
isodiametric, parenchymatous cells. 
Stem  - Shows single layered epidermis consisting of round or oval, thin-walled cells  
covered with striated cuticle; cortex 6-10 layered consisting  of  thin-walled oval to  
round, parenchymatous cells and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate measuring 55-77 µ 
in diameter; vascualr bundles arranged in a ring, with anomalous secondary growth;  
with are conjoint, bicollateral, open and endarch phloem narrow consisting of thin-
walled cells traversed by phloem rays; xylem consisting of usual elements traversed by  
xylem rays; there are two vascular bundles sittuated in the peripheral region of pith,  
each bundle consisting of xylem and phloem; pith distinct, composed of thin-walled,  
round to oval parenchymatous cells with intercellular spaces, a few parenchymatous  
cells contain rosette crystals of calcium oxalate. 
Leaf-
Midrib - shows single layered epidermis on both surfaces, covered wtith striated cuticle;  
collenchymatous cells, 2-4 layered towards ventral side forming 1-2 small patches, 1-2  
layered  towards  dorsal  side;  parenchymatous  cells,  thin-walled  round  or  oval,  
isodiametic cells, a few of them containing rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; vascular  
bundles three, each consisting of xylem and phloem, present in the centre. 
Lamina  -  dorsiventral;  shows  wavy  or  undulate,  irregular,  single  layered,  tabular  
epidermis cells present on both surfaces; stomata paracytic, more on ventral side and  
less on dorsal side; palisade 2-3 layers; spongy parenchyma 3-4 layered of oval or  
irregular loosely arranged cells; a few of them containing rosette crystals of calcium  
oxalate; stomatal index 22-26 in lower surface and 12-20 upper surface; palisade ratio  
3-5; vein-islet number 6-12 and veinlet termination number 8-10. 
112Powder - Olive green; shows fragments of parenchymatous cells, wavy or undulate  
irregular epidermal cells in surface view, paracytic stomata, palisade cells and xylem  
vessels with pitted and reticulate thickening and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     19   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica Gel 'G' plate using Toluene :  
Ethylacetate (9:1) shows in visible light three spots at Rf. 0.16, 0.33 and 0.44 (all green).  
Under U.V. (366 nm) five fluorescent zones visible at Rf. 0.16, 0.33, 0.44, 0.54 and 0.68  
(all red). On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots appear at Rf. 0.18, 0.25, 0.35, 0.44,  
0.59, 0.81, 0.94 and 0.96 (all yellow). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Sugar, Saponins & Sterols
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Gr¡h¢, Kaphahara, V¡tahara, Pitthara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Traika¸¶aka Gh¤ta. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - KuÀ¶ha, Pittavik¡ra., Raktavik¡ra 
DOSE  - 2 -3 g. of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
11348. Methi (Sd.) 
METHÌ (Seed) 
Meth¢  consists of seeds of Trigonella foenum-graecum Linn. (Fam. Fabaceae); an  
aromatic, 30-60 cm tall, annual herb, cultivated throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Methini 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:Fenugreek 
Gujrati  :Methi 
Hindi    :Methi 
Kannada:Menthe, Mente 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Uluva 
Marathi:Methi 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Methi 
Tamil   :Mendium, Ventaiyam 
Telugu  :Mentulu 
Urdu    :Methi 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seed oblong, rhomboidal with deep furrow running obliquely from one side,  
dividing seed into a larger and smaller part, 0.2-0.5 cm long, 0.15-0.35 cm broad,  
smooth, very hard; dull yellow; seed becomes mucilaginous when soaked in water;  
odour, pleasant; taste, bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Seed - Seed shows a layer of thick- walled, columnar palisade, covered externally with  
thick cuticle; cells flat at base, mostly pointed but a few flattened at apex, supported  
internally by a tangentially wide bearer cells having radial rib-like thickenings; followed  
by 4-5 layers of tangentially elongated, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; endosperm  
consists of a layer of thick-walled cells containing aleurone grains, several layers of thin  
walled, mucilaginous cells, varying in size, long axis radially elongated in outer region  
and tangentially elongated in inner region; cotyledons consists of 3-4 layers of palisade  
cells varying in size with long axis and a few layers of rudimentary spongy tissue;  
114rudimentary vascular tissue situated in spongy mesophyll; cells of cotyledon contain  
aleurone grains and oil globules. 
Powder - Yellow; shows groups of palisade parenchymatous cells, aleurone grains, oil  
globules, endosperm and epidermal cells of testa. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloid, Sapogenins and Mucilage.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphahara, Rucya, V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Mustak¡riÀ¶a, M¤tasaµj¢van¢ Sur¡. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Graha¸¢, Jvara, Prameha, Aruci 
DOSE  - 3-6 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
11549. Mulaka (W.P.)  
MÍLAKA (Whole Plant)  
M£laka  consists  of  fresh  whole  plant  of  Raphanus  sativus  Linn.  (Fam. 
Brassicaceae); an annual or biennial bristly herb, cultivated throughout the country upto an  
altitude of 3,000 m in the Himalayas and other hilly regions. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:-- 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Mula 
English:Radish 
Gujrati  :Mulo 
Hindi    :Muli 
Kannada:Moolangi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Mullanki 
Marathi:Mula 
Oriya   :Mula, Rakhyasmula 
Punjabi:Mulaka, Muli, Mula 
Tamil   :Mullangi 
Telugu  :Mullangi 
Urdu    :Muli 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Root cylindrical, variable size and thickness, having a few longitudinal striations;  
light greyish-brown externally and faint yellowish internally; odour, not distinct; taste,  
slightly pungent. 
Stem - Slender, hollow, cylindrical, compressed, smooth with branches arising at node  
and show longitudinal striations on drying; 0.1-1.0 cm in dia., yellowish-green. 
Leaf - Lower leaves hairy, petiole 5-5.3 cm long, lyrate, coarsely toothed; upper most  
leaves simple, sub-linear but narrowed at the base; bright green. 
Flower - Flower in long terminal raceme, bisexual, regular, complete 1-2 cm long,  
pedicel with scattered hairs; seplas 6.5-10 cm long, oblong, sometimes brown red; petals  
1.7-2.2 cm long, blade obovate, sub-marginate at the apex, white or lilac with yellow or  
116purple vein; stamen 6 in two whorls, two outer smaller and four inner longer; ovary  
superior, green or brown-purple, 10-12 ovuled; style about 4 mm long, 1-2 chambered. 
Fruit - Siliqua, erect, cylindrical, 3-9 cm long and 0.8- 1.4 cm thick, continuous or more  
or less constricted, longitudinally sulcatus, greenish-yellow, occasionally pale purple. 
Seed - Reddish-brown; irregularly globose, sometimes flattened, 2-4 mm long, 2 mm  
wide; surface generally smooth and sometimes wrinkled and grooved at micropylar end;  
taste, oily. 
b) Microscopic 
Root -  shows  3-10  layered  tangentially  elongated,  radially  arranged,  cork  cells;  
secondary cortex composed of wide zone of oval to polygonal, elliptical, thin-walled,  
parenchymatous  cells;  secondary  phloem  mostly  composed  of  sieve  elements  and  
parenchyma, traversed by phloem rays; secondary xylem mostly consisting of vessels  
and parenchyma, traversed by xylem rays; vessels mostly solitary or 2-3 in group;  
medullary rays four to many cells wide; starch grains simple and compound having 2-4  
components, solitary or ingroups, round to oval,measuring 6-14  µ in dia. present in  
cortex, phloem, xylem parenchyma and ray cells. 
Stem - Shows single layered epidermis with thick cuticle; cortex consists of 5-12 layers  
with intercellular spaces; endodermis at some places, single layered; pericycle occurs as  
crescent  shaped  groups  of  peri  cyclic fibres;  vessels  solitary  or  2-4  in  groups,  in  
macerated preparation show borderd pits and spiral thickening; tracheids and fibres  
aseptate  with  pointed  ends;  medullary  rays  1-3  cells  wide;  pith  a  wide  zone  of  
polygonal, parenchymatous cells; starch grains simple, round to oval, measuring 3-6 µ 
in dia. present in cortex and phloem. 
Leaf-
Petiole  - appears nearly circular in outline with two lateral wings; epidermis single  
layered, covered with thick cuticle; hairs unicellular, present only on upper side; cortex  
6-12 layers of oval to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; collateral vascular  
bundles arranged in a ring. 
Midrib - appears biconvex in outline; epidermis on both side covered with thin cuticle;  
epidermis followed by 6- 12 layers of parenchymatous cortex on both sides; vascular  
bundle three in number, one central and two lateral. 
Lamina - dorsiventral; epidermis on either surface with thin-cuticle; palisade 2-3 layers;  
spongy parenchyma 4-5 layers; anisocytic stomata present on both surfaces. 
117Fruit -  Shows  a  single  layered  epidermis,  covered  with  a  thin-cuticle;  epidermis  
followed by a wide zone of oval to polygonal, tangentially elongated, parenchymatous  
cells in which a few vascular bundles are embedded. 
Seed - Seed coat consists  of single layered epidermis of nearly rectanglular  cells,  
covered  with  thin,  straight  cuticle;  epidermis  followed  by  integument  of  radially  
elongated,  reddish-brown,  of  columnar  cells;  beneath  integument  2-3  layers  of  
compressed, thinwalled, parenchymatous cells present; endosperm and embryo consists  
of oval to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, containing aleurone grains and  
oil globules. 
Powder - Yellowish-green; shows aseptate fibres, spiral vessels, oil globules and round  
to oval starch grains, measuring 3-14  µ diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   18   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     30   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     22   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Glucoside, Volatile oil (containing butyl crotonyl isothiocyanate  
sulphide) with a typical radish odour
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana,  H¤dya,  Kaphahara,  P¡cana,  Pittahara,  Rucya,  Svarya,  
V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - M£lakakÀ¡ra, Gandhaka Va¶¢, Hajarulayah£da Bhasma 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Agnim¡ndya, Ar¿a, Gulma, P¢nasa, Ud¡varta. 
DOSE  - 20 - 40 ml. of the drug in juice form. 
   
  
11850. Mulaka (Rt.)  
MÍLAKA (Root) 
M£laka consists of fresh root of  Raphanus sativus Linn. (Fam. Brassicaceae); an  
annual or biennial bristly herb, cultivated throughout the country upto an altitude of 3,000  
m in the Himalayas and other hilly regions. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Salamarkataka, Visra, Saleya, Marusambhava 
Assamese:Mula 
Bengali:Mula 
English:Radish 
Gujrati  :Mulo, Mula 
Hindi    :Muli 
Kannada:Moolangi, Moclangi gadde, Mullangi, Mugunigadde 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Mullanki 
Marathi:Mula 
Oriya   :Mula, Rakhyasmula 
Punjabi:Mula, Mulaka, Muli 
Tamil   :Mullangi 
Telugu  :Mullangi 
Urdu    :Muli 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root fleshy, fusiform, cylindrical, having a few lateral fibrous roots, variable in  
size, usually 25-40 cm in length, sometime cultivated species 75-90 cm in length and  
50-60 cm  in girth; white in colour; taste, slightly or strongly pungent, rarely sweet. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   24   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     36   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     33   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
119T.L.C. 
T.LC. of alcoholic extract of drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Benzene: Ethy -
lacetate (9: 1) Under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones appear at Rf. 0.04 & 0.09  
(both blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf 0.04. 0.09, 0.34, 0.49  
& 0.69 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the  
plate for ten minutes at 110 ° C three spots appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.09 & 0.47 (all violet) 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glucoside, Methylmercaptan and Volatile Oil. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana,  H¤dya,  Kaphahara,  P¡cana,  Pittahara,  Rucya,  Svarya,  
V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Candanabal¡l¡kÀ¡di Taila, M£laka KÀ¡ra 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Agnim¡ndya, Ar¿a, áv¡sa, Gulma, Jvara, K¡sa, Netraroga, P¢nasa,  
Galaroga, Vrana, Dadru, Ud¡varta 
DOSE  - 15-30 ml. of the drug in the juice form 
   
  
12051. Mura (Rt.)  
MURË (Root) 
Mur¡ consists of dried root of Selinum candollei DC. Syn. S. tenuifolium Wall. ex 
DC. (Fam. Apiaceae ); a perennial herb, 0.6 - 2.4 m tall, found commonly in the Himalayas  
from Kashmir to Nepal at an altitude of 1800 - 42000 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Surabhi, Daitya, Gandhakuti, Gandhavati 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Musamansi 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Mura 
Kannada:Halukoratige, Haggoratige 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Muramanchi 
Marathi:Mura 
Oriya   :Muramansi 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Mural 
Telugu  :Mura 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Roots occur in broken and cylindrical pieces, 6-12 cm long and 0.3 - 1.5 cm  
thick with stem portions attached and covered with leaf sheaths, roots rough due to  
longitudinal striations and root scars; colour, dull brown; odour, aromatic; taste, slightly  
bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Root - Shows 10 - 25 layers of cork cells consisting of radially elongated, rectangular  
cells,  outer  cork  cells  filled  with  dark  brown  contents,  inner  cells  thin-walled,  
tangentially elongated; cork cambium consisting of 1-2 layered tangentially elongated,  
thin-walled cells; secondary cortex composed of rounded, parenchymatous cells with  
intercellular spaces; secondary phloem shows wide zone, consisting of sieve elements  
and  parenchyma,  traversed  by  phloem  rays;  cambium  2-4  layered,  consisting  of  
tangentially elongated, thin-walled cells; secondary xylem consisting of vessels, fibres  
and parenchyma, traversed by xylem rays; vessels solitary or in groups of 2-6 or more  
121having spiral thickenings; fibres aseptate, short with blunt ends; xylem rays 2-5 cells  
wide, composed of radially arranged, somewhat oval cells; starch grains simple, round  
to oval, measuring 7-55 µ in dia., present in secondary cortex, secondary phloem, xylem  
parenchyma, xylem and phloem rays; secretory canals numerous, distributed throughout  
secondary cortex, secondary phloem, secondary xylem and medullary rays; secretory  
canals lined by varying number of epithelial cells and filled with yellowish contents. 
Powder - Brown; shows groups of cork cells, parenchymatous cells, secretory canals, oil  
globules and simple starch grains, round to oval measuring 7-55 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   9    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   3.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     17   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Dihydropyrano-coumarines (identified as Isopteryxin and Anomalin),  
Sucrose and Mannitol. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Pittahara, V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Arvind¡sava, Karp£r¡dyariÀ¶a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áv¡sa, D¡ha, Jvara, Bhrama, M£rchha, T¤Àn¡ 
DOSE  - 1-3 g. of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
12252. Murva (Rt.)  
MURVË (Root) 
Murv¡  consists  of  dried  root  of  Marsdenia  tenacissima  Wight.  &  Am.  (Fam.  
Asclepiadaceae); a large stout, twining shrub, growing throughout the country
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Madhusrava, Madhurasa 
Assamese:Murha 
Bengali:-- 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Moravel 
Hindi    :Murva, Jartor 
Kannada:Koratige  Hambu,  Kallu  Shambu,  Koratige,  Halukaratige,  
Kadaluhaleballi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Perumkurumba 
Marathi:Morvel 
Oriya   :Murva, Murga 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Perunkurinjan 
Telugu  :Chagaveru 
Urdu    :Turbud Safed 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root cylindrical, available in cut pieces of varying length and 0.5-3 cm thick,  
externally yellow to buff coloured with dark brown patches on the cork; prominent  
longitudinal ridges and furrows and transverse cracks present; bark easily separable from  
wood; fracture, short and granular in bark region and fibrous in wood; taste, slightly  
bitter; odour, indistinct. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Root - Shows a cork, composed of 15-25 layers of thin-walled, tangentially elongated,  
rectangular cells, some filled with reddish-brown contents; secondary cortex composed  
of an outer region of broken ring of stone cells of varying thickness, followed by wide  
zone of oval to polygonal parenchymatous cells; stone cells yellow in colour of variable  
shapes and size; secondary phloem composed of mostly parenchyma with small patches  
of sieve elements and small strands of stone cells, similar to those present in secondary  
cortex; resin cells present irregularly in this region; phloem fibres absent; phloem rays 1  
123-  3  cells  wide;  secondary  xylem  segmented  and  shows  a  wedge-shaped  structure,  
consisting  of  small  tangential,  concentric  bands  of  unlignified  masses  of  
parenchymatous  tissue,  separated  by  similar  concentric  band  of  lignified  tissue,  
composed of vessels,tracheids, fibres, fibre tracheids and xylem parenchyma; in isolated  
preparation xylem vessels cylindrical with transverse articulations, vary in shape and  
size with borderd pits; fibres much elongated with mostly tapering ends and pitted walls;  
thick-walled and lignified parenchyma possess simple and bordered pits and scalariform  
thickening; xylem rays not distinctly marked where adjoining parenchyma is delignified;  
rosette and a few prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and abundant starch grains,  
present in parenchymatous  tissues; starch grains simple, elliptical to spherical with  
central hilum, 5.5-22  µ dia., compound starch grains having 2-3 or rarely upto 6  
components. 
Powder - Light brown; shows a number of stone cells, fibres, tracheids, fibretracheids,  
vessels with pitted walls, fragments of cork, rosette and prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate, simple and compound starch grains, measuring 5.5 - 22 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Resin 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¡tahara, ViÀaghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - Ëragvadh¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a, Pa¶olad¢ Kv¡tha C£r¸a,  
Prameha Mihira Taila, Sudar¿ana C£r¸a. 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  Ar¿a,  H¤droga,  Jvara,  K¤miroga,  Ka¸·£,  Medoroga,  Meha,  
Raktapitta, Mukha áosa, T¤Àn¡. 
DOSE  - 2-6 g. of the drug in powder form.
  10-20 g. of the drug for decoction. 
12453. Nagakesar (Stmn.)  
NËGAKEáARA (Stamen) 
N¡gake¿ara consists of dried stamens of Mesua ferrea Linn. (Fam. Guttiferae); an  
evergreen tree, about 15-18 m high with short trunk, often buttressed at the base, occurring  
in the Himalayas from Nepal eastwards, Bengal, Assam, evergreen rain forests of North  
Kanara, Konkan, forests of Western Ghats and Andhra Pradesh. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Ke¿ara, N¡gapuÀpa, N¡ga, Hem¡, Gajake¿ara 
Assamese:Negeshvar, Nahar 
Bengali:Nageshvara, Nagesar 
English:Cobras Saffron 
Gujrati  :Nagkesara,  Sachunagkeshara,  Nagchampa,  Pilunagkesar,  
Tamranagkesar 
Hindi    :Nagkesara, Pila Nagkesara 
Kannada:Nagsampige, Nagakesari 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Nangaa, Nauga, Peri, Veluthapala, Nagppu, Nagappovu 
Marathi:Nagkesara 
Oriya   :Nageswar 
Punjabi:Nageswar 
Tamil   :Naugu, Naugaliral, Nagachampakam, Sirunagappu 
Telugu  :Nagachampakamu 
Urdu    :Narmushk, Nagkesar 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Stamen consists of anther, connective and filament; coppery or golden  
brown; filament united at base forming a fleshy ring; each stamen 0.9-1.9 cm long;  
anther about 0.5 cm long, linear, basifixed, containing pollen grains; filament 0.8 - 1.0  
cm long; slender, filiform, more or less twisted, soft to touch, quite brittle; connective  
not visible with naked eye; odour, fragrant; taste, astringent. 
b) Microscopic 
Androecium  -  Anther  shows  golden-brown,  longitudinally  dehiscent  anther  wall,  
consisting of thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, pollen grains numerous in groups or in  
single,  yellowish  and  thin-walled,  many  pollen  grains  having  1-3  minute,  distinct  
protuberances on walls, thick-walled, exine and intine distinct. 
Powder  - Brown; shows elongated cells of filament, connective and numerous golden  
yellow pollen grains having 1-3 protuberances. 
125IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential oil and Oleo-resin. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :RukÀa, Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Írdhajatrugatarogahara, Kaphahara, Var¸ya, Vastiv¡t¡mayghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Candanabal¡l¡kÀ¡di Taila, Kum¡ry¡sava, N¡gakesar¡di  
C£r¸a. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Raktapitta, V¡tarakta, áopharoga, Vastiroga 
DOSE  - 1-3 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
12654. Nili (Lf.)  
NÌLÌ (Leaf) 
N¢l¢ (leaf) consists of dried leaf of Indigofera tinctoria Linn. (Fam. Fabaceae); a  
shrub, 1.2- 1.8 m high, found throughout and widely cultivated in many parts of the  
country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:N¢l¢k¡, N¢l¢n¢, Rangapatr¢ 
Assamese:Nilbam 
Bengali:Nil 
English:Indigo 
Gujrati  :Gali, Galiparna 
Hindi    :Nili 
Kannada:Karunili 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Neelamar 
Marathi:Neel 
Oriya   :Nili, Nila 
Punjabi:Neel 
Tamil   :Avuri 
Telugu  :Nili Chettu, Nili 
Urdu    :Neel 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs mostly in the form of leaflets and broken pieces of rachis; leaflet 1- -
2.5 cm long and 0.3-1.2 cm wide, oblong or oblanceolate with very short mucronate tip;  
pale green to greenish-black; no characteristic odour and taste. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Leaf-
Petiole - appears nearly circular in outline having two lateral wings; epidermis single  
layered covered externally with thin cuticle and followed internally by single layered  
collcnchymatous cells; pericycle present in the form of continuous or discontinuous  
ring, vascular bundles collateral and three in number, large one present in central and  
two  smaller  in  lateral  wings;  pith  composed  of  round  to  oval,  thin-walled  
parenchymatous cells, a few prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate present in phloem and  
pith region. 
127Midrib - shows epidermis, cuticle and hair, similar as in petiole; beneath epidermis on  
lower side single or 2-3 layers of colienchyma on upper side present, both followed by 2-  
3 layers of thin-walled parenchyma; vascular bundle single, collateral and crescent  
shaped. 
Lamina - shows dorsiventral structure; epidermis, cuticle and hair, similar as in petiole  
and midrib; palisade 2-3 layers; spongy parenchyma 2-4 layered, a few patches of veins  
scattered  between  palisade  and  spongy  parenchyma,  prismatic  crystals  of  calcium  
oxalate rarely present in me sophyll cells; paracytic stomata and hair present on both  
surfaces but abundant in lower surface 
Powder - Greenish-grey; shows groups of mesophyll cells, aseptate fibres, pitted vessels,  
unicellular hairs and rarely prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7.5 per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     25   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycoside  (Indican).
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Ke¿ya, V¡tahara, Recan¢ 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - N¢l¢ Bh¤´g¡di Taila, Mah¡pancagavya  Gh¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Ëmav¡ta, Gulma, Jvara, K¡sa, K¤imiroga., Pl¢haroga, Ud¡varta.,  
Udararoga, V¡tarakta., ViÀavik¡ra 
DOSE  - 50-100 g. of decoction. 
   
  
12855. Nili (Rt.)  
NÌLÌ (Root) 
N¢l¢ (Root) consists of dried root of Indigofera tinctoria Linn. (Fam. Fabaceae); a  
shrub,  1.2-1.8  m high,  found  throughout and  widely  cultivated  in  many  parts of  the  
country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:N¢l¢k¡, Rangapatr¢, N¢lin¢ 
Assamese:Nilbam 
Bengali:Nil 
English:Indigo, Indian Indigo 
Gujrati  :Gali, Nil, Gari 
Hindi    :Nili 
Kannada:Kadunili, Karunili, Nili, Neeligida, Olleneeli 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Amari, Nila 
Marathi:Nili, Nila 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Neel 
Tamil   :Avuri, Neeli 
Telugu  :Nili, Nili Chettu, Aviri 
Urdu    :Neel 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root mostly available in pieces, hard, woody, cylindrical, 0.1 -1.5 cm  thick,  
surface  nearly  smooth  except  for  a  few  scattered  lenticels;  pale-yellow  to  light  
yellowish-brown; odour not distinct; taste, slightly bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Root -Shows a narrow zone of cork consisting of 4- 10 layers of tangentially elongated,  
rectangular, thin-walled cells, with lenticels; secondary cortex a narrow zone, consisting  
of rectangular to polygonal, thin-walled cells, group of fibres, measuring 11-17  µ in 
dia., thick-walled and lignified with wide lumen; secondary phloem composed of usual  
elements; wood occupies bulk parts of the root, consisting of usual elements; vessels  
solitary or 2-4 in groups having simple pits; fibres present in the form of alternating  
bands of parenchyma; parenchyma cells rectangular to polygonal in shape and attached  
on both the opposite sides of vessels; medullary rays 1 -4 cells wide; prismatic crystals  
of calcium oxalate present in secondary cortex, phloem and xylem parenchyma and rays;  
129oil globules present in cortex and phloem parenchyma; starch grains simple, round to  
oval, measuring 3-11  µ  in dia., present in cortex, phloem, xylem parenchyma and rays. 
Powder - Creamish-brown; shows aseptate fibres, pitted vessels, simple and compound  
starch grains, measuring 3-11  µ in dia., rarely oil globules and prismatic crystals of  
calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.7  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'GF 254 + Silica gel 'G' (1:3  
w/w)  plate  using  Chloroform  :  Ethylacetate  (6:4)  show  under  U.V.  (366  nm)  ten  
fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.14 (blue), 0.30 (bluish green), 0.40 (blue), 0.47 (blue), 0.58  
(blue), 0.63 (bluish green), 0.75 (blue), 0.81 (blue), 0.86 (green) and 0.91 (blue). On  
exposure to Iodine vapour thirteen spots appear at Rf. 0.06, 0.10, 0.14, 0.27, 0.33, 0.40,  
0.50, 0.58, 0.63,0.75, 0.80,0.86 and 0.91 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic  
Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 110 °C for ten minutes fourteen spots  
appear at Rf. 0.06, 0.10, 0.14, 0.21, 0.27, 0.33, 0.40, 0.50, 0.58, 0.63, 0.75, 0.81, 0.86,  
and 0.91 (all grey). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycoside (Indican)
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Ke¿ya, Recan¢, V¡tahara, Bhrama Mohahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Arvind¡sava, Triphal¡di Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  Gulma,  K¡sa,  Pl¢h¡roga,  Ud¡varta,  Udararoga,  V¡tarakta,  
ViÀavik¡ra, Ëmav¡ta, K¤imiroga. 
DOSE  - 48 g. of drug for decoction. 
13056. Nimba (Lf.)  
NIMBA (Leaf)  
Nimba (Leaf) consists of dried leaf of  Azadirachta indica A . Juss Syn.  Melia 
azadirachta  Linn.  (Fam.  Meliaceae);  a  moderate  sized  to  fairly  large  evergreen  tree,  
attaining  a  height  of  12-15  m  with  stout  trunk  and  spreading  branches,  occurring  
throughout the country up to an elevation of 900 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:AriÀ¶a, Picumarda 
Assamese:Mahanim 
Bengali:Nim, Nimgach 
English:Margosa Tree 
Gujrati  :Limba, Limbado, Limado, Kohumba 
Hindi    :Nim, Nimba 
Kannada:Nimba, Bevu, Oilevevu, Kahibevu, Bevinama 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Veppu, Aryaveppu, Nimbam, Veppa 
Marathi:Balantanimba, Limba, Bakayan, Nim, Kadunimb 
Oriya   :Nimba 
Punjabi:Nimba, Bakan, Nim 
Tamil   :Vemmu, Veppu, Arulundi, Veppan 
Telugu  :Vemu, Vepa 
Urdu    :Neem 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaves - Compound, alternate, rachis 15-25 cm long, 0.1 cm thick; leaflets with  
oblique base, opposite, exstipulate, lanceolate, acute, serrate, 7-8.5 cm long and 1.0-1.7  
cm wide, slightly yellowish-green; odour, indistinct; taste, bitter
 
b) Microscopic 
Leaf-
Midrib  -leaflet  through  midrib  shows  a  biconvex  outline;  epidermis  on  either  side  
covered externally with thick cuticle; below epidermis 4-5 layered collenchyma present;  
stele composed of one crescent-shaped vascular bundle towards lower and two to three  
smaller  bundle  towards  upper  surface;  rest  of  tissues  composed  of  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells having secretory cells and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate;  
phloem surrounded by non-lignified fibre strand; crystals also present in phloem region. 
131Lamina  - shows dorsiventral structure; epidermis on either surface, composed of thin  
walled, tangentially elongated cells, covered externally with thick cuticle; anomocytic  
stomata present on lower surface only; palisade single layered; spongy parenchyma  
composed of 5-6 layered, thin-walled cells, traversed by a number of veins; rosette  
crystals of calcium oxalate present in a few cells; palisade ratio 3.0-4.5; stomatal index  
13.0-14.5 on lower surface and 8.0-11.5 on upper surface. 
Powder - Green; shows vessels, fibres, rosette crystals of calcium oxalate, fragments of  
spongy and palisade parenchyma. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     13   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     19   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Triterpenoids  and Sterols.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Gr¡h¢, V¡tal¡, Pittan¡¿aka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - K¡s¢s¡di Gh¤ta, J¡ty¡di Gh¤ta, Ërogyavardhin¢ Gu¶ik¡,  
Nimbapatr¡diupan¡ha, Pa¸cagu¸a Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Jvara, K¤miroga, KuÀ¶ha, Netraroga, Prameha, Vrana, Ëma¿otha,  
ViÀarogas 
DOSE  - 1-3 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   10-20 ml of the drug for decoction. 
   
  
13257. Nimba (St.Bk)  
NIMBA (Stem Bark)  
Nimba (stem bark) consists of stem bark of Azadirachta indica A . Juss. Syn. Melia 
azadirachta  Linn.  (Fam.  Meliaceae); a  moderate  sized  to  fairly  large,  evergreen  tree,  
attaining  a  height  of  12-15  m  with  stout  trunk  and  spreading  branches,  occurring  
throughout the country upto an elevation of 900 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:AriÀ¶a, Picumarda 
Assamese:Mahanim 
Bengali:Nim, Nimgacha 
English:Margosa Trees 
Gujrati  :Kadvo Limbdo 
Hindi    :Nim, Nimb 
Kannada:Bevu, Kahibevu, Nimba, Oilevevu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Veppu, Aruveppu 
Marathi:Balantanimba, Kadunimb, Limba 
Oriya   :Nimba 
Punjabi:Nim, Nimba, Bakam 
Tamil   :Veppai, Vembu 
Telugu  :Vemu, Vepa 
Urdu    :Neem 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark varies much in thickness according to age and parts of tree from where it is  
taken; extemal surface rough, fissured and rusty-grey; laminated inner surface yellowish  
and foliaceous, fracture, fibrous; odour, characteristic; taste, bitter
 
b) Microscopic 
Stem Bark -Shows outer exfoliating pieces hard, woody, considerably thick in older  
barks;  almost  entirely  dead  elements  of  secondary  phloem,  alternating  with  
discontinuous tangential bands of compressed cork tissue, former composed of several  
layers of stone cells occurring in regularly arranged groups together with collapsed  
phloem elements filled with brown contents; in between the successive zones of cork  
tissue 3-5 layers of fibre groups with intervening thin-walled and often collapsed phloem  
elements present; each zone of cork tissue consists of several layers of regular, thin-
walled cells occasionally with a few compressed rows of thick-walled cells towards  
133outer surface; within exfoliating  portion a number of layers of newly formed cork  
composed of thin walled, rectangular cells and one or two layers of cork cambium,  
below which a wide zone of secondary phloem present; secondary cortex absent in most  
cases; secondary phloem commonly composed of well-developed fibre bundles traversed  
by 2-4 seriate phloem rays and transversely separated by bands of parenchymatous tissue  
of phloem; phloem elements of outer bark mostly collapsed; a few fairly large secretory  
cavities also occur in phloem; most of phloem parenchyma contain starch grains and  
prismatic  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  starch  grains,  simple,  round  with  central  
hilum,measuring 2.75-5  µ  structure of bark varies considerably according to gradual  
formation of secondary cork bands. 
Powder - Reddish-brown; shows numerous prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, phloem  
fibres with narrow lumen and pointed ends; cork cells, stone cells mostly in groups,  
lignified rectangular to polygonal, having wide lumen and distinct striations, simple  
starch grains, measuring 2.75-5 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform :  
Ethylacetate; Formic acid (5:4: I:) shows under U.V. (366nm) three fluorescent zones at  
Rf. 0.72 (blue), 0.86 (blue), and 0.90 (green). On spraying with 5% Methanolic  
Phosphomolybdic acid reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at 105 °C four 
spots appear at Rf. 0.20, 0.45, 0.63 and 0.90 (all blue). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Bitter principles Nimbin and Nimbiol
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Ka¸·ughna,  Kaphahara,  Pittahara,  ViÀaghna,  Vra¸a¿odhanakara,  H
¤dayavid¡ha¿¡ntikara 
 
134IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Sudar¿ana C£r¸a., Nimb¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a, Nimb¡di C
£r¸a, Pa´canimba C£r¸a, Pa´catikta Guggulu Gh¤ta,  
Pathy¡di Kv¡tha (âa·anga)  C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - D¡ha, Jvara, K¤miroga, Ka¸·u, KuÀ¶ha, Prameha, Rakta Pitta,  
Vra¸a 
DOSE  - 2-4 g. of the drug in powder form.
   Decoction should be used externally. 
   
  
13558. Palasha (St.Bk)  
PALËSA (Stem Bark) 
Pal¡sa consists of dried stem bark of  Butea monosperma  (Lam.) Kuntze (Fam.  
Fabaceae); a medium sized tree with somewhat crooked trunk, 12 - 15 m high with  
irregular branches, commonly found throughout the greater part of the country upto about  
915 m, except in very arid parts. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:KiÆ¿uka, RaktapuÀpaka 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Palash Gachha, Palash, Palas 
English:Bastard peak 
Gujrati  :Kesudo, Khakharo, Khakhapado 
Hindi    :Dhak, Tesu 
Kannada:Muttug, Muttuga, Muttala 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Plasu, Camata, Plas, Chama Tha 
Marathi:Palas 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Palash, Dhak, Tesu 
Tamil   :Purasu, Paras 
Telugu  :Moduga, Modugu, Chettu 
Urdu    :Dhak, Palaspapda 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Mature stem bark, 0.5 - 1 cm thick, greyish to pale brown, curved, rough due to  
presence of rhytidoma, and scattered dark brown spots of exudate; rhytidoma 0.2 cm  
thick usually peels off, exposing light brown surface, exfoliation of cork and presence of  
shallow longitudinal and transverse fissures; fracture, laminated in outer part and fibrous  
in inner part; internal surface rough, pale brown; taste, slightly astringent. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Stem Bark  -Mature  bark  shows  rhytidoma  consisting  of  alternating  layers  of  cork,  
secondary  cortex  and  phloem  tissue; cork cells, thin-walled, 5-10  or  more layered,  
rectangular, dark-brown; secondary cortical cells round and irregular in outline, dark  
brown,  moderately  thick-walled;  tanniniferous  cells,  often  in  groups,  having  brown  
colour, sometimes containing mucilage and other materials found scattered in this zone;  
beneath this zone regular cork consisting of 4-12 rows of radially arranged, rectangular  
136cells followed by a zone of 2 - 4 layers of sclereids; secondary phloem consisting of  
sieve  tubes,  companion  cells,  phloem  parenchyma,  phloem  fibres,  crystal  fibres,  
traversed  by  phloem  rays;  in  outer  and  middle  phloem  regions  phloem  tissues  get  
crushed and form tangential bands of ceratenchyma; phloem fibres arranged in tangential  
bands alternating with sieve tubes and phloem parenchyma; most of fibre groups contain  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate forming crystal sheath; in macerated preparation  
phloem fibres appear thick-walled lignified elongated with tapering or bifurcated ends;  
crystal fibres divided  into  a number  of  chambers containing  a prismatic crystal of  
calcium oxalate in each chamber; phloem rays multiseriate 4 - 12 cells wide, 7 - 50 cells  
in height, straight; prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate found scattered in the secondary  
phloem  tissues  and  phloem  rays;  starch  grains  simple  or  compound  having  2  -  3  
components, measuring 2.75 - 13.75  µ in dia., found scattered in phloem parenchyma  
and phloem ray cells abundantly; tanniniferous cells and secretory cavities also occur in  
secondary phloem. 
Powder - Reddish-brown; shows numerous prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, starch  
grains simple and compound with 2 - 3 components measuring 3-14  µ in dia., dark 
brown  coloured  cells,  sclereids  mostly  in  groups,  thin-walled  cork  cells,  numerous  
crystal fibres in group or singles
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   12   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10  per cent, Appendix     2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene :  
Ethylacetate (90: 10) under U.V. (366 nm) shows four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.10,  
0.18, 0.48, 0.65 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.10,  
0.48 and 0.67 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating  
the plate for about ten minutes at 105 °C three spots appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.48 and 0.67 (all  
violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Kinotannic acid and Gallic acid.
 
137PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Sara, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :V¤Àya, Kaphav¡ta¿¡maka, Agnid¢paka, S¡raka 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Pal¡¿a  KÀ¡ra,  Nyagrodh¡di  Kv¡tha  C£r¸a,  
Mah¡n¡r¡ya¸a Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Ar¿a, Graha¸¢, Gulma, Vra¸a, K¤miroga. 
DOSE  - 5-10 g. of the drug in powder form for decoction.  
   
  
13859. Paribhadra (St.Bk)  
PËRIBHADRA (Stem Bark) 
P¡ribhadra  consists  of  the  dried  stem  bark  of  Erythrina  indica  Lam.  (Fam. 
Fabaceae); medium sized, quick growing tree, distributed widely in deciduous forests  
throughout India, also grown in gardens as an ornamental plant and as a support for black  
pepper vine. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:P¡ribhadraka, Ka¸takiÆ¿uka 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Pattemadar 
English:Coral tree 
Gujrati  :Panderavo 
Hindi    :Pharahada, Pangara 
Kannada:Hongar, Halivanadamar 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Murrikku 
Marathi:Pangara 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Kalyanamurongai, Mulmurumgai 
Telugu  :Badisa, Varifamu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Mature dried stem bark about 0.5-2.0 cm thick, smooth, exfoliating in narrow  
strips; outer surface yellowish to yellowish-grey, lenticels found at short intervals longi -
tudinal  lines  on  the  outer  surface,  yellowish  to  cream  coloured;  whole  bark  
differentiated into outer non-fibrous and inner fibrous zones, outer bark breaks readily  
with a short fracture, inner bark fibrous.
b) Microscopic 
Stem Bark - Mature bark shows stratified and lignified cork of about 2-9 or more alter -
nating bands of narrow tangentially elongated compressed, yellowish coloured cells and  
of  wider  cells  in  3-25  or  more  layers,  tangentially  elongated  to  squarish,  radially  
arranged and thin-walled; a few cells contain prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate;  
secondary  cortex  consists  of  large,  somewhat  tangentially  elongated  to  polygonal,  
parenchymatous cells, a few cells contain prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, stone  
139cells occur in singles or in groups which are circular, elongated or rectangular in shape,  
parenchymatous cells surrounding stone cells groups, contain large crystals of calcium  
oxalate; secondary phloem consisting of sieve tubes with their companion cells, phloem  
fibres and phloem parenchyma traversed by phloem rays; phloem fibres, mostly arranged  
in  tangential  strips  alternating  with  the  regular  thin-walled  phloem  elements,  sieve  
elements in outer and middle regions of phloem mostly get collapsed and crushed and  
form many tangen tial strips of ceratenchyma between the tangential groups of phloem  
fibres;fibres large, thick-walled with narrow lumen; crystal fibres numerous, septate and  
each  chamber  con tains  a  single  prismatic  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  phloem  
parenchyma thin-walled, a few of them contains crystals of calcium oxalate similar to  
those found in the secondary cortex and crystal fibres; phloem rays numerous and mostly  
multiseriate running almost straight in the inner phloem region but bent towards left or  
right in the outer phloem re gion; ray cells thin-walled, radially elongated in the inner  
region and slightly tangentially elongated towards outer region in transverse section. 
Powder - Crearnish-yellow; shows stratified cork, pieces of phloem fibres, stone cells  
and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   13   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2.5  per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids and Resins
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :K¤mighna, Kaphahara, Medohara, V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Abhay¡ Lava¸a, Nyagrodh¡di C£r¸a, N¡r¡ya¸a Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áotha, K¤miroga, Kar¸aroga. 
DOSE  - 6-12 g. of the drug in powder form. 
              12-24 g of the drug for decoction. 
   
14060. Pippali mula (Stm.)  
PIPPALÌMÍLA (Stem) 
Pippal¢m£la  consists  of  dried,  cut,  stem  pieces  of  Piper  longum  Linn.  (Fam. 
Piperaceae); a slender, aromatic, creeping and perennial herb; native of the hotter parts of the  
counrty and found wild as well as cultivated extensively in Bengal and southern states. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:M¡gadh¢, Granthik¡, Pippalik¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Pipulmul 
English:Piper root 
Gujrati  :Gantoda, Ganthoda 
Hindi    :Piparamula 
Kannada:Modikaddi, Hippali, Tippali, Modi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kattuthippaliver, Tippaliveru 
Marathi:Pimplimula 
Oriya   :Pippalimula, Bana Pippalimula 
Punjabi:Pippalimula, Magha 
Tamil   :Kanda Tippili, Ambinadi Desavaram 
Telugu  :Modi, Madikatta 
Urdu    :Filfil Daraz 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug available in cut pieces, having distinct internodes and swollen nodes with a  
number of small rootlets and root scars; stout, cylindrical, 0.2-0.6 cm thick, reddish  
brown to grey; odour, aromatic; taste, pungent. 
b) Microscopic 
Stem -  Shows  a  single  layered  epidermis  followed  by  a  continuous  ring  of  
collenchymatous and round to oval thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; vascular bundles  
show peripheral and medullary arrangment, separated from each other by a wavy strip of  
sclerenchyma forming a ring, enclosing pith; bundles collateral and arranged in rings,  
having sclerenchymatous sheath of pericyclic cap over phloem; xylem wedge-shaped;  
starch grains simple and compound having 2-7 components, round to oval, measuring  
3-14 µ in dia., present abundantly throughout the section. 
Powder - Reddish-brown to crearnish-grey; under microscope shows scalariform vessels,  
aseptate fibres, simple and compound starch grains measuring 3-14 µ  in diameter. 
141IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.2  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4.0  per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene:  
Ethylacetate (9:1) shows under U.V. light eight spots at Rf. 0.04 (yellow), 0.12 (light  
green), 0.25 (green), 0.31 (light green), 0.36 (light green),0.53 (light green), 0.65 (green)  
and 0.97 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.13, 0.25, 0.40,  
0.89, 0.93 (all yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent two orange coloured spots  
appear at Rf. 0.13 & 0.25.
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids (Piperine, Piperlongumine, Piperlonguminine etc),  
Essential Oils.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana,  Kaphahara,  P¡cana,  Rucya,  V¡tahara,  V¡t¡nulomana,  
Vulaprasamana 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Pa´cakola  C£r¸a,  Da¿am£la  Taila,  Da¿am
£lapa¸cakol¡di  Kv¡tha  C£r¸a,  Da¿am
£laÀ¶apalaka Gh¤ta. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Ën¡ha, Gulma, K¤miroga, Udararoga, V¡taroga 
DOSE  - 0.5 - 1g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
14261. Plaksha (St.Bk)  
PLAKâA (Stem Bark) 
PlakÀa  consists of dried stem bark of  Ficus lacor Buch. - Ham. =  F.  lucescens 
Blume., Syn. F. infectoria Roxb. (Fam. Moraceae); a large spreading tree, with occasional  
aerial roots, found nearly throughout the country and commonly planted as an avenue and  
ornamental tree. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Parkar¢, Parkat¢, Jat¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Pakur 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Paras pipalo, Pepli 
Hindi    :Pakad 
Kannada:Karibasari, Kadubasari, Jeevibasari, Basari, Juvvebasari 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Itti, Ittiyadi, Itthy 
Marathi:-- 
Oriya   :Pakali, Pakal 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Icchi, Itthi, Kallalnaram 
Telugu  :--- 
Urdu    :Pakhad 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark rough, occurring in flat to curved, quilled pieces, measuring 0.4-0.7 cm in  
thickness;  external  surface  ash  or  whitish-grey;  numerous  transversely  arranged  
lenticels; ranging from 0.1 cm - 1.3 cm in length, lip-shaped and exfoliating; internal  
surface rough, fibrous, longitudinally striated, reddish-brown; fracture, fibrous. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Shows  5-8  layered  cork  consisting  of  thin-walled,  rectangular  cells,  a  few  
external  layers  exfoliating;  secondary  cortex  very  wide  consisting  of  compactly  
arranged,  rectangular,  thick-walled,  pitted  cells,  patches  of  circular  to  elongated,  
lignified, elliptical stone cells with radiating canals, a few with concentric striations; a  
few prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and reddish-brown contents found scattered  
throughout the secondary cortex; secondary phloem  very wide consisting of mostly  
stratified layers of  collapsed  cells  forming ceratenchyma, groups  of  fibres, phloem  
143parenchyma, laticiferous  cells, traversed by 2-5 seriate phloem  rays; phloem  fibres  
lignified with wide lumen and pointed tips; thin-walled, rectangular, a few phloem  
parenchyma containing prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. 
Powder - Reddish-brown; shows thick-walled parenchyma with simple pits; stone cells  
in groups and singles, prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, elongated phloem fibres  
with wide lumen and pointed tips. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sterols, Sugar, Tannin, Alkaloid and Saponin
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :áramahara, Kaphahara, Medohara, Pittahara, Stambhana, Dahahara, Sa
´gr¡h¢, Bhagnas¡dhaka, Yonidosahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Nyagrodh¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a, N¡lp¡mar¡di Taila, Marma  
Gu¶ik¡ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áotha, Raktapitta, Visarpa, Vra¸a, Yoniroga, M£rc¡, Atis¡ra. 
DOSE  - 50 g. of the drug in powder form for decoction.  
   
  
14462. Prasarini (W.P.)  
PRASËRIÛÌ (Whole Plant) 
Pras¡ri¸¢ consists of dried whole plant of Paederia foetida Linn. (Fam. Rubiaceae);  
an extensive foetid smelling perennial climber, found in most of the parts of country.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:S¡ra¸¢, Pras¡ra¸¢, Gandhapatra 
Assamese:Bhedilata 
Bengali:-- 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Prasarini 
Hindi    :Gandha Prasarini 
Kannada:Hesarani, Prasarini bail 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Tala nili 
Marathi:Hiranvel, Haranvel 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Prasarini 
Tamil   :Mudiyar Kundal 
Telugu  :Gontima goru-Teega 
Urdu    :--- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Tap root 2-4 cm long, 0.5-2 cm thick, cylindrical or sub cylindrical, tortuous,  
having a number of branches and rootlets; dark brown; surface rough due to longitudinal  
wrinkles, ridges and fissures; remnants of rootlet, thin scars and numerous horizontal  
lenticels also present; fracture, short in bark region and somewhat fibrous in wood;  
odour, disagreeable and foetid more marked in fresh samples; taste, indistinct. 
Stem -  Slender,  sub-erect  with  diffuse  branching,  upto  4  cm  thick;  subcylindrical  
showing a dumb-bell shaped appearance in transverse view due to presence of two  
prominant furrows running opposite each other on both surfaces, externally dark brown,  
longitudinal anastomosing wrinkles, ridges and a few transverse cracks and circular  
lenticels, fracture, fibrous; odour, foetid more marked in fresh samples; taste, indistinct. 
145Leaf - Simple, petiolate, stipulate; 10-15 cm long, 5-6 cm broad; somewhat glabrous;  
ovate, entire, base narrow or broad, apex acute or cuspidate; stipule ovate, lanceolate,  
bifid, entire, acute, base broad with hairy surface, texture, thin; odour, foetid more  
distinct in fresh samples; taste, indistinct. 
Flower - Violet to pink; bracteate, pedicellate, bisexual, calyx campanulate, acutely,  
toothed; corolla funnel-shaped, usually pubescent, somewhat gibbous and wooly inside,  
limb narrow, divided into five cordate crenulate segments, lobes short; filament short,  
inserted irregularly about the middle of the tube, anther erect within the tube; ovary  
turbinate, two celled containing one ovule, each attached to the bottom of the cell; style,  
simple; stigma two cleft with lobes bent amongst the anther. 
Fruit - Berry, orbicular, ellipsoid, compressed, smooth with five lines on each side, one  
celled, two seeded, 1.1 cm across, red or black. 
Seed - Compressed, smooth, enlarged with somewhat membranous ring all round. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Root - Mature root shows 6-13 layers of cork, composed of tangentially elongated cells,  
in outer few layers somewhat collapsed, lignified and filled with brown content; cork  
cambium 1-2 layers; secondary cortex 5-16 layers of thin-walled; somewhat radially  
arranged parenchymatous  cells; secondary phloem  appears as wedge-shaped conical  
masses consisting of sieve elements and parenchyma traversed by phloem rays; major  
portion  of  phloem  element  thick-walled,  sieve  elements  form  collapsed  masses  of  
ceratenchyma in outer region and intact in inner most region; uni to biseriate phloem  
rays  composed  of  usually  thick-walled  cells  in  outer  and  middle  phloem  region;  
multiseriate  phloem  rays  composed  of  thin-walled  parenchymatous  cells  showing  
funnel-shaped dilatation in outer phloem region; in tangential section through inner  
phloem region sieve cells shows beaded thickening; cambium 1-3 layered; secondary  
xylem consists of wide zope of lignified and non-lignified tissue traversed by xylem  
rays;  lignified  tissue  consists  of  vessels,  tracheids  and  fibres;  non-lignified  tissue  
consists of thin-walled parenchymatous cells; xylem vessels distributed singly or in  
groups of two to three having variable shape and bordered pits; tracheids long and  
narrow having bordered pits; fibres long, narrow having simple pits; xylem parenchyma  
have  simple  pits  or  reticulate  thickening;  xylem  ray  cells  thin-walled,  circular  to  
somewhat  radially  elongated  in  non-lignified  zone  and  thick-walled,  lignified  and  
radially elongated in lignified zone having simple pits; starch grains as granular masses,  
oil globules as small circular bodies and raphides of calcium oxalate present in a few  
cells of secondary cortex, phloem, xylem and medullary rays. 
Stem - Mature stem shows 7-11 layers of cork composed of rectangular cells, a few  
outer  layers  lignified;  secondary  cortex  6-9  layers  consisting  of  thin-walled  
parenchymatous cells; pericyclic fibres present in singles or in groups of two to three,  
146much elongated and septate with very narrow lumen; secondary phloem much similar to  
that of root having thick-walled phloem elements, arranged in wedged-shaped conical  
masses,  with  ceratenchyma,  two  types  of  phloem  rays,  sieve  cells  with  beaded  
thickening; cambium 1-2 layers; secondary xylem represented by lignified and non-
lignified tissues; inner most xylem composed of thin compact band of 8-9 layers of  
lignified tissue with primary xylem attached towards pits, xylem vessels associated with  
tracheids, fibres and lignified or non-lignified parenchyma; a few xylem vessels show  
tyloses; all elements have similar pittings as described in case of root; uni and biseriate  
rays thin-walled but lignified; in lignified region, multiseriate rays usually thin-walled;  
centre of stem occupied by small pith and a few sclereids; a few cells of secondary  
cortex, phloem, xylem, medullary rays and pith contain starch grains, oil globules and  
raphides of calcium oxalate. 
Leaf-
Petiole  -  shows  similar  structure  as  midrib  but  differs  in  possesing  trichomes  
comparatively smaller, as well as two more somewhat spherical accessory bundles, one  
flanking on each side of median vascular bundle close to lateral extensions where they  
further split after reaching distal end of petiole; starch grains, oil globules and raphides  
of calcium oxalate similar to those of root and stem also present in parenchymatous cells  
of petiole, midrib and in mesophyll cells ofleaf. 
Midrib  - composed of single layered epidermis covered with cuticle; ground  tissue  
consisting  of  2-5  layered  of  collenchyma  towards  upper  and  lower  side  and  rest  
parenchyma; a larger median crescent-shaped vascular bundle consisting usual elements  
with xylem towards upper side and phloem towards lower side. 
Lamina  - shows a dorsiventral structure; epidermis single layered covered externally  
with striated cuticle; uniseriate covering trichomes and paracytic stomata present on both  
surfaces; mesophyll composed of single layered palisade cells and 3-4 layered spongy  
tissue;  in  margin  of  leaf  mesophyll  replaced  by  thick-  walled  cells;  veins  usually  
surrounded by bundle sheath, larger veins transcurrent and smaller ones embedded; vein  
islet number 5-10 per sq. mm., palisade ratio 6.75-14.2 .
Powder - Dark green; shows fragments of cork cells, palisade cells, raphides of calcium  
oxalate, oil globules and starch grains
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than  21  per cent, Appendix        2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
147 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids, Volatile Oil. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Guru, Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :V¡tahara, V¤Àya, Balak¤t, Sandh¡¸k¤t 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Da¿am£l¡riÀ¶a., Pras¡ri¸¢ Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - V¡tarakta., V¡taroga 
DOSE  - 2-4 g. of drug in powder form. 
   
  
14863. Priyala (Sd.)  
PRIYËLA (Seed) 
Priy¡la consists of seed of Buchanania lanzan Spreng . Syn. B. latifolia Roxb. (Farn, 
Anacardiaceae); an evergreen tree upto 15 m high, found throughout the country in dry  
deciduous forests. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Piy¡laka, Bhaulavalkala 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Chirangi, Chowl, Satdhan 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Charal, Shalichokha 
Hindi    :Piyal, Piyar, Chiraungi 
Kannada:Nurlaal 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Mural, Priyalam, Mural maram 
Marathi:Charoli 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Muolaima, Korka, Saraparuppu 
Telugu  :Sara, Sarapappu 
Urdu    :Chironji 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seed laterally much compressed, creamish-brown, mottled with darker  
brown lines, 0.4-0.6 cm long, 0.3-0.5 cm wide, occasionally separate cotyledons also  
occur, funicle stout, micropyle superior, linear, hilum present at the apex of round edge;  
slight pressure separates oily cotyledons; odour, pleasant; taste, sweetish-oily. 
b) Microscopic 
Seed - Longitudinal section of seed-coat shows epidermis consisting of polygonal cells  
with scattered, large, pitted, thick-walled, sclerenchymatous cells, occurring mostly in  
groups, followed by remnants of disorganised, collapsed cells of integument, which are  
of various size, thin-walled and parenchymatous cells filled with brownish content and  
form a pigment layer, below which a band of parenchymatous cells present, consisting of  
elongated  or  tubular  cells;  cotyledons  consisting  of  epidermis  and  thin-walled  
parenchymatous  cells,  epidermal  cells  of  cotyledons  barrel-shaped  and  the  
parenchymatous  cells  polyhedral  and  filled  with  aleurone  grains  of  globoid  
149type,measuring  2.5-5.0  µ  in  dia.  and  oil  globules;  procambium  bundles,  running  
longitudinally also occur among these parenchyma cells. 
Powder - A creamish-brown paste; shows numerous mesophyll cells, filled with oil  
globules  and  aleurone  grains  of  globoid  type  measuring  2.5-5.0  µ   in  dia.  and 
sclerenchymatous cells, in surface view seed coat polyhedral in shape, thick-walled and  
filled with brownish contents. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica Gel 'G' plate using Benzene :  
Ethylacetate (3:1) shows under U.V. (254 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.72 and 0.94  
(blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.08, 0.27, 0.54, 0.72,  
0.91, 0.94 and 0.98 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and  
on heating the plate for ten minutes at 105 °c eight spots appear at Rf. 0.08, 0.27, 0.54,  
0.72, 0.84, 0.91, 0.94 and 0.98 (all violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Albuminoids, Oil and Starch. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Sara, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :áramahara,  Balya,  Bhagnas¡dhaka,  H¤dya,  Kaphakara,  Pittahara,  
V¡tahara, V¤Àya, áukrakara, BrÆha¸a, Ëmavardhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - P£gakha¸·a, Priy¡la Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - D¡ha, KÀata, Raktapitta, KÀaya. 
DOSE  - 10 - 20 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
15064. Priyangu (Infl.)  
PRIYA×GU (Inflorescence) 
Priya´gu consists of dried inflorescence of  Callicarpa macrophylla  Yahl. (Fam. 
Verbenaceae); an erect, 1.2- 2.4 m high shrub, found throughout North and East India  
ascending to 1800 m in the West Himalayas from Kashmir to Assam, and abundant in  
Bengal plains. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Phalin¢, Vanit¡ 
Assamese:Priyangu 
Bengali:Priyangu 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Lata Priyangu 
Hindi    :Priyangu 
Kannada:Priyangu, Gandhapriyangu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Njazhal 
Marathi:Priyangu, Gavhala 
Oriya   :Priyangu 
Punjabi:Priyangu 
Tamil   :Gnazhal, Gnazalpoo 
Telugu  :Prakhanam, Prenkanamu 
Urdu    :--- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Inflorescence - Cymose, densely clothed with wooly hairs; 2.5-7.5 cm across, peduncle  
cylindrical, 1.5 - 3 mm in dia; densely hairy. 
Flower - 0.5 cm long; brown, calyx, bell-shaped, 4 toothed covered with wooly hairs;  
corolla, brown, tubular, 4 lobbed spreading; stamens 4, equal in size, epipetalous, anther  
ovate, basifixed; filament very long, hairy; ovary 2-4 celled; style, long; stigma minutely  
capitate. 
b) Microscopic 
Peduncle - Shows more or less wavy outline, epidermis single layered with stellate hairs;  
cortex composed of 10-18 layers of elliptical, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, a few  
upper  layers  filled  with  reddish-brown  contents;  pericycle  appears  in  the  form  of  
interrupted ring of pericyclic fibres; phloem composed of usual elements except phloem  
151fibres; xylem consists of usual elements; vessels mostly solitary with spiral thickening;  
fibres aseptate. 
Powder - Brown; shows abundant numbers of stellate hairs, spiral vessels, aseptate  
fibres, groups of thin-walled, elliptical, oval and round pollen grains with clear exine  
and yellowish in colour. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycosides, Terpenes, Phenolic compound, Resin and Saponin. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Pittahara,  V¡tahara,  Rakta,  Pras¡dana,  Daurgandhyahara,  Pur¢Àasa
´graha¸¢ya, M£travirajan¢ya, Sandh¡n¢ya, Vra¸aropa¸a. 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Khad¢r¡di Gu¶ik¡, (Mukharoga), El¡di C£r¸a, Kanaka  
Taila, Ku´kum¡di Taila, N¢lik¡dya Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - D¡ha, Jvara, Rakta-Pitta, Pakv¡tis¡ra, Sved¡dhikya. 
DOSE  - 1-3 g. of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
15265. Shali (Rt.)  
áËLÌ (Root) 
á¡l¢ consists of dried root of Oryza sativa Linn. (Fam. Poaceae); an annual herb,  
cultivated throughout India. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Dh¡nya, Vr¢hi, Nivara 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Chaval, Dhana, Cala, Chawl, Sali, Dhan 
English:Rice, Paddy 
Gujrati  :Shalichokha, Bhata, Corava, Damgara, Coke 
Hindi    :Chaval, Dhana 
Kannada:Bhatto, Nellu, Bhatta, Akki 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Ari, Nellu 
Marathi:Tandulamul, Dhanarmul, Bhata Chamul 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Dhan, Jhona 
Tamil   :Arishi, Nelver 
Telugu  :Dhanyamu, Odalu, Biyyamu 
Urdu    :Chaval, Biranj 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root fibrous, thin, cylindrical, 5-15 cm in length and 0.05-0.1 cm thick with a few  
rootlets, soft, smooth; creamish-brown to greyish-brown.  
b) Microscopic 
Root - Shows single layered epidermis consisting of thin-walled, rectangular cells with a  
few  unicellular  root  hairs;  exodermis  1-2  layered,  composed  of  thick-walled,  
sclerenchymatous cells; cortex differentiated into three zones; outer 5-8 and inner 2-3  
layered,  both  consisting  of  round  to  oval,  parenchymatous  cells  with  intercellular  
spaces; middle zone consisting of radially elongated, parenchymatous cells having very  
large air-spaces; endodermis and pericycle both single layered; xylem and phloem form  
equal number of bundles arranged alternately with each other; centre occupied by a  
small pith composed of polygonal, thick-walled, sclerenchymatous cells. 
Powder  - Greyish-cream; shows groups of sclerenchymatous cells, pitted vessels and  
153prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   21   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   16   per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sugars
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :áukrala,  Baddh¡lpavarcasa,  Balya,  BrÆha¸a,  CakÀuÀya,  H¤dya,  
Kaphahara,  M£trala,  Pittahara,  Rucya,  Svarya,  V¡tahara,  Var¸ak¤t,  
Stanyajanana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Br¡hma Ras¡yana, Stanyajanana KaÀk¡ C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - StanyakÀaya, M£trak¤cchra 
DOSE  - 50 g. of the drug for decoction.  
   
  
15466. Sankha pushpin (W.P.)  
áA×KHAPUâPÌ  (Whole Plant)  
áa´khapuÀp¢ consists of  whole  plant of  Convolvulus pluricaulis Choisy  (Fam. 
Convolvulaceae); a prostrate, sub-erect, spreading, hairy, perennial herb with a woody root  
stock, found throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:áa´khpuÀp¡, áa´kh¡hv¡  
Assamese:--  
Bengali:Sankhapuspi 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Shankhavali  
Hindi    :Shankhapushpi 
Kannada:Bilikantisoppu, Shankhapushpi, Shankhauli 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Sankhahuli, Shankhavela, Sankhapuspi  
Oriya   :Sankhapuspi 
Punjabi:Ksirapuspi, Sankhapuspi, Sankhahuli  
Tamil   :Kakattam, Kakkanangudi, Karakhuratt, Sanghupushpam 
Telugu  :Shankhapushpi 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Usually branched, cylindrical, ribbed having some rough stem nodules and small  
secondary roots, 1-5 cm long, 0.1-0.4 cm thick, yellowish-brown to light brown. 
Stem - Slender, cylindrical, about 0.1 cm or less in thickness with clear hairy nodes and  
internodes; light green. 
Leaf - Shortly petiolate, linear-lanceolate, acute, hairy on both surfaces; 0.5-2 cm long  
and 0.1-0.5 cm broad; light green. 
Flower  - White or pinkish; solitary or in pairs sessile or sub-sessile in the leaf axis;  
sepals narrowly, linear-lanceolate, sparsely hairy; corolla shortly discoid; stamen 5, free,  
epipetalous, alternate with the petals, inserted deep in the corolla tube; ovary superior  
and bicarpellary. 
155Fruit - Capsule, oblong globose with coriaceous, pale brown pericarp. 
Seed - Brown; minutely puberulous.
b) Microscopic 
Root - Appears nearly circular in outline; cork composed of 10-15 layers of tangentially  
elongated, thick-walled cells; cortex composed of 6-10 layers of oval to elongated,  
elliptical,  parenchymatous  cells  and  yellowish-brown,  tanniniferous,  secretory  cells  
present in this region; phloem composed of sieve elements, phloem parenchyma and  
phloem rays; xylem consisting of usual elements; vessels solitary or in groups of two  
with simple pits; fibres and tracheids aseptate and pitted; medullary rays 1-3 cells wide  
and multicellular in length; starch grains solitary or in groups, simple and composed of  
2-3 components, round to oval in shape, measuring 3-8  µ  in dia., present in cortex,  
phloem, xylem rays and parenchyma. 
Stem - Shows single layered epidermis, covered with thick cuticle; at places unicellular  
hairs present; cortex differentiated in two zones, 2-3 upper collenchymatous and 1-2  
lower parenchymatous layers, both having round to oval, elongated, thin- walled cells;  
endoderrnis single layered; pericycle present in the form of single strand of fibres;  
phloem a narrow zone, mostly composed of sieve elements and parenchyma; xylem  
consists of vessels, fibres and parenchyma; medullary rays and tracheids not distinct,  
vessels mostly solitary with spiral thickening; fibres aseptate having pointed ends and  
narrow lumen; strand of internal phloem present around the slightly lignified pith. 
Leaf-
Midrib - appears convex in lower and concave in upper side; epidermis single layered,  
covered with thick cuticle; lower epidermis followed by 2-3 layers of chlorenchymatous  
cells; vascular bundle bicollateral, composed of usual elements of phloem and xylem;  
rest of tissue between chlorenchyrna and vascular bundles composed of 4-5 layers of  
parenchymatous cells. 
Lamina - shows epidermis on both surfaces covered with thick cuticle; hairs unicellular,  
present on both surfaces, palisade two layered, spongy parenchyma 4-5 layered; a few  
bicollateral vascular bundles present in spongy parenchyma; palisade ratio 6-9; vein islet  
number 21-25 per sq. mm. , stomatal index in lower surface 17-20 and in upper surface,  
13.8-17.0; stomatal number in lower surface 184-248, and in upper surface 202-238 per  
sq. mm. 
Powder  - Light yellowish-green; shows groups of vessels with spria1 thickening and  
simple pits, fibres and tracheids, simple and compound starch grains, measuring 3 - 8 µ 
in dia., unicellular hairs, mesophyll cells and gives positive test for tannin. 
156IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   17   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloid
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Sara 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Balya, ËyuÀya, Kaphahara, Medhya, Pittahara, Ras¡yana, Mohan¡¿aka  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - Br¡hm¢ Gh¤ta, Agastyahar¢tak¢, Ras¡yana, Br¡hma,  
Ras¡yana,  M¡nasmitra  Va¶aka,  Gorocan¡di  Va¶¢,  
Br¡hÆ¢ Va¢ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - M¡nasaroga, Apasm¡ra 
DOSE  - 3-8 g. of the drug in powder form 
            
Note: In certain parts of India, Clitoria ternatea Linn. and Evolvulus alsinoides  Linn. are used 
as áa´khapuÀp¢ 
   
  
15767. Saptala (W.P.)  
SAPTALË (Whole Plant) 
Saptal¡ consists of dried whole plant of  Euphorbia dracunculoides  Lam. (Fam. 
Euphorbiaceae); a much branched, 20-40 cm high, annual herb, found throughout India in  
the plains and low hills. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:S¡tal¡, Carmas¡hv¡, CaramakaÀ¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Chagalpupti 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Satale 
Hindi    :Titali, Joyachi, Chagulputputi 
Kannada:Satala, Bilikalli, Kalli 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Chasma Lantha, Pathiri 
Marathi:Nivadung 
Oriya   :Naagapheni, Siju, Saptala 
Punjabi:Kangi 
Tamil   :Tillakada, Thusimullai 
Telugu  :Tillakada 
Urdu    :Thuhar 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Small, 4-5 cm long, 0.5-2 mm thick, cylindrical, ribbed, gradually tapering,  
having a few secondary roots, pale brown, fracture, short,  odour and taste indistinct.
Leaf - 1.7-7 cm long, 0.2-0.8 cm wide, sessile, linear, lanceolate or linear oblong,  
subacute,  base  rarely  rounded  or  sub-cordate;  greenish-yellow;  odour  and  taste  not  
distinct. 
Flower - Involucre broadly campanulate, sub-sessile, solitary, 2.5 mm across at the  
mouth,  glabrous  outside  and  pubescent  inside,  lobes  short,  ovate,  ciliolate;  gland  
semilunate, horned; filament pubescent; style, 1 mm long, free to the base, shortly 2-fid  
at the apex. 
Fruit - Capsule, smooth; 3-4 mm in dia; trilocular, 3- celled with or without attached  
pedicel. 
158Seed - 3 mm long, ellipsoidal to oblong with a white, leprous tuberculate testa, rounded  
at the base, grooved at one side, with an arillode at the oblique depressed apex. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Root - Young root shows exfoliated, single layered epidermis; mature root shows  
thin  walled  cork,  composed  of  10-12  layers  of  rectangular  cells;  secondary  cortex  
consists  of  4-  6 layers  of  oval, elliptical, parenchymatous  cells;  oval  to  elongated  
elliptical thick walled, lignified cells with wide lumen; groups of stone cells and a few  
fibres present in this region; endoderm is and pericycle not distinct; secondary phloem  
composed of sieve elements and parenchyma; secondary xylem consists  of vessels,  
fibres, tracheids and medullary rays; all elements thick-walled and lignified; fibres and  
vessels having simple pits; starch grains simple, rounded to oval, 2.75 µ in dia; found 
scattered in phloem region; rarely a few oil globules also present. 
Stem -  Shows  a  single  layered  epidermis  composed  of  thick-walled,  flattended,  
tangentially elongated cells; older stem shows 4-5 layers of cork composed of thin-
walled, rectangular, tangentially elongated and radially arranged cells; cortex composed  
of  4-5  layers  of  oval  to  rectangular,  tangentially  elongated  elliptical,  thin-walled  
parenchymatous cells; stone cells oval to elongated, elliptical, thick-walled lignified,  
with wide lumen present in this region; endodermis not distinct; pericycle represented  
by groups of lignified fibres; secondary phloem narrow, composed of sieve elements,  
phloem parenchyma and a few elongated laticiferous sacs; secondary xylem composed  
of vessels, fibres and tracheids, traversed by numerous xylem rays; all elements, thick-
walled and lignified, vessels having simple pits; fibres elongated and aseptate; centre  
occupied by a pith, consisting of thick-walled, circular to oval, parenchymatous cells;  
some  rounded,  small  laticiferous  sacs  present  in  peripheral  pith  cells,  filled  with  
yellowish-brown  content;  starch  grains  more  abundant  in  phloem  and  pith  region,  
simple, solitary or in groups, rounded to oval, measuring 5.5-19.25 µ in diameter. 
Leaf-
Midrib  - shows slightly convex outline; epidermis single layered, covered externally  
with thick, striated cuticle; hypodermis consists of single layered collenchymatous cells  
towards lower side; vascular bundle collateral and surrounded by 4-6 layers of thin-
walled, parenchymatous cells. 
Lamina  -shows slightly wavy outline; epidermis on either covered with thick cuticle;  
paracytic stomata present on both surfaces; mesophyll differentiated into palisade and  
spongy parenchyma; palisade single layered present on both sides; spongy parenchyma  
4-5 layered consisting of irregularly arranged cells present between upper and lower  
palisade; a few small collateral vascular bundles embedded in spongy parenchyma. 
159Powder -  Light  yellow;  shows  vessels  with  simple  pits,  aseptate  fibres;  oval  to  
elongated, elliptical, stone cells thick-walled, lignified with wide lumen; simple, rounded  
to oval starch grains, measuring 3-19 µ  in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G'  plate using Chloroform :  
Methanol (95:5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two blue fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.04 and  
0.67. On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf.0.04, 0.46, and 0.57 (all  
yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate  
for ten minutes at 105 °C two spots appear at Rf. 0.46 (brown) and 0.87 (violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glyco-alkaloid (Euphorbine). 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, RaktadoÀahara, V¡tal¡, Vi·bhedin¢ 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Br¡hm¢ Gh¤ta, Mi¿raka Sneha, N¡r¡ya¸a C£r¸a. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Ën¡ha, Gulma, Udararoga, Vibandha, Ud¡vartta, Visarpa. 
DOSE  - 50 g. of the drug for decoction. 
   
  
16068. Satahva (Fr.)  
áATËHVË (Root) 
áat¡hv¡ consists of the dried ripe fruits of Anethum sowa Roxb. ex Flem. Syn. A. 
graveolens  Linn.  var.  sowa  Roxb.;  A.  graveolens  DC.;  Peucedanum  sowa  Roxb.;  P. 
graveolens  Benth.  (Fam.  Apiaceae);  a  tall,  glabrous,  aromatic  herb  found  throughout  
tropical and sub-tropical regions of the country and cultivated.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:áatapuÀp¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Suva, Sulpha, Shulupa, Sowa 
English:Indian Dil Fruit 
Gujrati  :Suva 
Hindi    :Soya, Sova 
Kannada:Sabasige 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Badishep, Shepa, Shepu 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Soya 
Tamil   :Satakuppa 
Telugu  :Sadapa 
Urdu    :Shibt, Soya 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruits, dark brown, often stalk attached, broadly oval and compressed dorsally;  
mericarps  usually  separate  and  free,  4  mm  long,  2-3  mm  broad  and  1  mm  thick,  
glabrous, traversed from the base to apex by 5 lighter coloured primary ridges of which  
3 dorsal, slightly raised, brown, filiform and incospicuous, 2 lateral prolonged into thin,  
yellowish membranous wings; odour, faintly aromatic resembling that of caraway, and a  
warm, slightly sharp taste, akin to caraway. 
b) Microscopic 
Fruit - Pericarp shows epidermis of polygonal tabular cells having thick outer wall and  
striated cuticle; mesocarp, parenchymatous, some cells lignified and show reticulate  
thickening; endocarp consists of tabular cells sometimes with sinuous anticlinal walls;  
vittae, 4 on the dorsal valleculae and 2 on the commissural surface, extending the length  
of each mericarp with an endothelium of brown cells and containing volatile oil; dorsal  
161costae three, one larger and the two lateral broadly winged, each costae with vascular  
strands; endosperm much flat tened and consists of thick-walled, cellulosic, parenchyma  
containing fixed oil and numerous aleurone grains upto 5  µ in diameter containing  
micro-rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; carpophore split, passing at the apex into the  
raphe of each mericarp containing a vascular strand of sclerenchymatous fibres and  
spiral vessels. 
Powder - Brown; shows spiral vessels, micro-rosette crystals of calcium oxalate and oil  
globules, aleurone grains upto 5 µ  in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   14   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5   per cent, Appendix     2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Volatile oil                               Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.10 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene shows  
on exposure to Iodine vapour two spots at Rf. 0.59 and 0.68 (all yellow). On spraying  
with Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at  
110° C three spots appear at Rf. 0.37 (pink) 0.59 (blue) and 0.68 (violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential Oil.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphahara, V¡tahara, á£lpra¿amana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Gorocan¡di Va¶¢, B¤hat Phala Gh¤ta, N¡r¡yana C£r¸a,  
âa·bindu Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - á£la, Atis¡ra, Jvara, Vra¸a, Netra Roga 
DOSE  - 3-6 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
16269. Shigru (Lf.)  
áIGRU (Leaf) 
áigru consists of dried leaf of Moringa oleifera Lam. Syn. Moringa pterygosperma  
Gaertn. (Fam. Moringaceae); a small or medium sized tree, found wild in sub Himalayan  
tract, commonly cultivated throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:áobh¡µjana, Bahala, T¢kÀ¸agandh¡, AkÀ¢va, Mocaka 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Sajina, Sajna, Sajne 
English:Horse Radish Tree, Drum Stick Tree 
Gujrati  :Sargavo, Sekato, Saragavo Parna 
Hindi    :Shajoma, Mungna 
Kannada:Neegge, Nugge ele 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Murinna, Tishnagandha, Muringa, Muringa Elai 
Marathi:Sevaga, Segata, Segata pana, Shewgachi pane 
Oriya   :Sajana, Munga, Munika 
Punjabi:Sohanjana 
Tamil   :Murungai, Murungai Ilai 
Telugu  :Munaga Aku 
Urdu    :Sehjan 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaves tripinnate compound, available in the form of leaflets and some broken  
pieces of rachis, slender, thickened, and articulated at the base; leaflet 1.2-2 cm long and  
0.5-1 cm wide, entire, elliptic, ovate or obovate, rounded or narrowed at base and obtuse  
at apex; smooth and greenish-grey to pale green; odour and taste not distinct. 
b) Microscopic 
Rachis - Rachis shows single layered epidermis, followed by single layer of pigmented  
collenchymatous hypodermis; cortex consisting of 5-10 layered, oval to elliptical, thin  
walled, parenchymatous cells; pericycle forming a broken ring, consisting of pericyclic  
fibres;  vascular  bundle  collateral;  pith  composed  of  wide  zone  of  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells; rosette crystals of calcium oxalate present in cortex, pith and  
phloem parenchyma. 
Leaflet - Leaflet shows dorsiventral structure; epidermis and unicellular hairs present on  
both the surfaces; palisade single layered; spongy parenchyma 2-3 layers; central region  
163occupied by a crescent-shaped, collateral vascular bundle surrounded by 2-4 layers of  
collenchymatous cells; rosette crystals of calcium oxalate present in mesophyll and  
collenchymatous cells; stomata anornocytic, present on both surface but more on lower  
sur face; palisade ratio 6-11; stomatal index 10-13-15 stomatal number 100-137 upper  
surface and 290-350 lower surface per mm square; vein islets number 50-65. 
Powder -Greyish-green;  shows  groups  of  spongy  parenchyma,  palisade  cells;  spiral  
vessels, unicellular hairs with blunt tip; pieces of polyhedral epidermal cells in surface  
view, stomata and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   16   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     22   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene :  
Ethylacetate (9: 1) shows six spots at Rf. 0.05, 0.18, 0.26 (all green),0.36 (yellowish  
green), 0.46 (dark green) & 0.94 (yellow) in visible light. Under U.V. (366 nm) six fluo -
rescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.05, 0.18, 0.26, 0.36, 0.46 (all red) & 0.94 (blue). On  
spraying with 5% Methanolic Phosphomolybdic acid reagent six spots appear on heating  
the plate for ten minutes at 105 ° C at Rf. 0.38, 0.46 (both blue), 0.52 (green), 0.59  
(blue),  0.69  (blue)  and  0.87  (blue).  On  spraying  with  Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric  acid  
reagent ten spots appear on heating the plate for ten minutes at 105 °C at Rf. 0.05, 0.20,  
0.26, (all green), 0.30 (pink), 0.36 (green), 0.46 (green), 0.53 (yellow), 0.69 (yellow),  
0.82 (yellow) and 0.94 (violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Carbohydrate, Protein, Carotene and Ascorbic acid. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :CakÀuÀya, Medohara, Pittahara, V¡tahara, áukra N¡¿aka, K¤mihara, B
¤Æhana, Sirovirecaka 
 
164IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Ratnagiri Rasa, ViÀatinduka Taila, Ek¡ngav¢ra Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  áopha,  Gulma,  K¤miroga,  Medoroga,  Pl¢haroga,  Vidradhi,  
Galaga¸·a. 
DOSE  - 10 - 20 ml of the fresh drug in juice form.  
   
  
16570. Sthulaela (Sd.)  
STHÍLAILË (Seed) 
Sth£lail¡  consists  of  dried  seed  of  Amomum  subulatum  Roxb.  (Fam. 
Zingiberaceae); a herb with leafy stem and perennial root stock; cultivated in swampy  
places along the sides of mountain streams in Bengal and Assam. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Bhadr¡, Bhadrail¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Baara aliach 
English:Greater or Nepal cardamom 
Gujrati  :Elaicho, Mothi Elichi 
Hindi    :Bari elachi 
Kannada:Dodda Yalakki, Nepdi Elakki 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Valiya Elam, Perelam 
Marathi:Mothi Elayachi 
Oriya   :Bada aleicha, Aleicha 
Punjabi:Budi Eleichi 
Tamil   :Periya Elam, Beraelam, Kattu Elam 
Telugu  :Pedda Elakulu 
Urdu    :Badi Elaichi, Heel Kalan 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seed 0.4 cm long, 0.3 cm wide, irregularly ovoid with 3 flattened face  
covered externally with a colourless, membraneous aril; brown to dark brown; odour,  
aromatic; taste, spicy pungent. 
b) Microscopic 
Seed -Shows a very thin membraneous aril composed of several layers of collapsed cells  
containing oil globules and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; testa consists of single  
layered epidermis of rectangular cells followed by 1-2 layers of collapsed, thin-walled  
parenchymatous cells, beneath this a single layered large rectangular cells containing oil  
globules present, which is internally surrounded by several layers of flattened, thin  
walled,  parenchymatous  cells;  perisperm  consists  of  polygonal,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells containing round to oval starch grains measuring 2-5 µ  in dia., 
and cluster crystals of calcium oxalate; perisperm surrounded externally by thick-walled,  
sclerenchymatous, radially elongated dark brown beaker cells; perispenn encloses the  
166endosperm and embryo, both composed of polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells,  
rich in protein. 
Powder - Light brown; shows fragments of testa, polygonal, thin-walled, perisperm cells,  
oil globules, rarely cluster crystals of calcium oxalate, rounded to oval, simple, starch  
grains measuring 2-5  µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Volatile oil                               Not less than      1 v/wper cent, Appendix   2.2.10 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Volatile Oil (rich in Cineole). 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pan¢,  Kaphahara,  V¡tahara,  Rocaka,  Mukha¿odhaka,  
Angamardapra¿amana 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  S¡rivady¡sava,  Karp£r¡dy¡rka,  Kaly¡¸aka  Gh¤ta,  
Vastyamay¡ntaka Gh¤ta, M¡nasamitra Va¶aka. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áv¡sa, K¡sa, Mukharoga, T¤À¸¡, Chardi, H¤ll¡sa, Ka¸·u. 
DOSE  - 0.5 -1 g. of the drug in powder form.  
Note - Cluster crystals of calcium oxalate are present in Sthulaela ( Amomum subulatum  
Roxb.(Seed), while absent in Suksamaila (Elettaria cardamomum  Maton. (Seed).  
   
  
16771. Tejovati (St.Bk.) 
TEJOVATÌ (Stem Bark) 
Tejovat¢ consists of dried stem bark of Zanthoxylum armatum DC. Syn. Z. alatum 
Roxb. (Fam. Rutaceae); an evergreen or sub-deciduous shrub or occasionally a small tree  
upto 6 m high, stem and branches, armed with long, sharp prickles, found in the hot valleys  
of the Himalayas from Jammu to Khasia hills at 600-1800 m and eastern ghats in Orissa  
and Andhra Pradesh at 1200 m, also sometimes planted for hedges in Assam. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Tejohva 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Tejovati 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Tejabala, Tejbal 
Hindi    :Tejbal 
Kannada:Tejapatri, Jimmi, Tumbura, Tumburudra, Tejovanti 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Thumboonal, Thumbooni, Valiyavaluzhavam 
Marathi:Tejabal 
Oriya   :Tejabala 
Punjabi:Tejovati, Tejabal 
Tamil   :Thejyovathi 
Telugu  :Tejovathi 
Urdu    :Kabab-e-Khandan 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark  corky,  channelled  and  single  quilled  with  large  marks  of  tubercular  
prickles;0.1-0.2 cm thick, external surface pale brown, rough with numerous scattered  
patches of lenticels, rather deeply furrowed; internal surface smooth, light yellow to  
pale brown; fracture, short; odour, aromatic; taste, aromatic pungent.
b) Microscopic 
Stem Bark - Shows exfoliated cork interrupted by lenticels at some places; cork 15-20  
layers  of  tabular,  brownish,  thick-walled  cells;  secondary  cortex  10-20  layers  of  
tangentially elongated or oval, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; small groups of stone  
cells and some fibres found scattered in this region; secondary phloem consisting of  
sieve elements, parenchyma and fibres traversed by phloem rays; phloem fibres thick-
walled,  lignified,  aseptate  and  arranged  in  tangential  rows;  stone  cells  found  in  
168tangential  bands  alternating  with  phloem  fibres;  a  number  of  secretory  cells  found  
scattered throughout secondary phloem; phloem rays 1-2 cells wide and 10-15 cells high;  
secretory cells contain ing oily or resinous substances; prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate  and  simple  starch  grains  found  scattered  in  secondary  cortex,  phloem  
parenchyma and phloem rays; starch grains round and oval, measuring 2.75 - 13.75 µ in 
diameter. 
Powder - Yellowish-brown; shows fragments of cork cells; aseptate fibres, stone cells,  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, oil globules and starch grains, round and oval  
measuring 2.75 - 13.75  µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   12   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     8.5  per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     13   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  A bitter crystalline principle identical with Berberine, a Volatile Oil  
and Resin.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphahara, Medhya, P¡cana, Rucya, V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Pancatikta Guggulu Gh¤ta, K¡laka C£r¸a (Lepa). 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Aruci, áv¡sa, Ëmav¡ta, K¡sa, Mukharoga, Hikk¡. 
DOSE  - 10-20 g. of the drug for decoction.  
   
  
16972. Tulasi (W.P.) 
TULASÌ (Whole Plant) 
 Tulas¢ consists of dried whole plant of Ocimum sanctum Linn . (Fam. Lamiaceae);  
an erect, 30 - 60 cm high, much branched, annual herb, found throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Suras¡, K¤À¸atulas¢, Bana Tulas¢ 
Assamese:Tulasi 
Bengali:Tulasi 
English:Holy Basil 
Gujrati  :Tulasi, Tulsi 
Hindi    :Tulasi 
Kannada:Tulasi, Shree Tulasi, Vishnu Tulasi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Tulasi, Tulasa 
Marathi:Tulas 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Tulasi 
Tamil   :Tulasi, Thulasi, Thiru Theezai 
Telugu  :Tulasi 
Urdu    :Raihan, Tulsi 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Thin, wiry, branched, hairy, soft, blackish-brown externally and pale. violet  
internally. 
Stem -  Erect,  herbaceous,  woody,  branched;  hairy,  sub  quadrangular,  externally  
purplish-brown to black, internally cream, coloured; fracture, fibrous in bark and short in  
xylem; odour faintly aromatic. 
Leaf - 2.5-5 cm long 1.6 - 3.2 cm wide, elliptic oblong, obtuse or acute, entire or serrate,  
pubescent on both sides; petiole thin, about 1.5-3 cm long hairy; odour, aromatic; taste,  
characteristic. 
Flower - Purplish or crimson coloured, small in close whorls; bracts about 3 mm long  
and broad, pedicels longer than calyx, slender, pubescent; calyx ovoid or campanulate  
3-4 mm bilipped, upper lip broadly obovate or suborbicular, shortly apiculate, lower lip  
170longer than upper having four mucronate teeth, lateral two short and central two largest;  
corolla about 4 mm long, pubescent; odour, aromatic; taste, pungent. 
Fruit - A group of 4 nutlets, each with one seed, enclosed in an enlarged, membranous,  
veined  calyx,  nutlets  sub-globose  or  broadly  elliptic,  slightly  compressed,  nearly  
smooth; pale brown or reddish with small black marking at the place of attachment to the  
thalamus; odour, aromatic; taste, pungent. 
Seed  - Rounded to oval; brown, mucilaginous when soaked in water, 0.1 cm long,  
slightly notched at the base; no odour; taste, pungent, slightly mucilaginous.
b) Microscopic 
Root - Shows a single layered epidermis followed by cortex, consisting of seven or more  
layers of rectangular, round to oval polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, filled  
with brown content, inner layers of cortex devoid of contents; phloem consisting of  
sieve elements, thin-walled, rectangular parenchyma cells and scattered groups of fibres,  
found scattered in phloem; xylem consists of vessels, tracheids, fibres and parenchyma;  
vessels pitted; fibre tracheides, long, pitted with pointed ends; fibres thick walled and  
with pointed ends. 
Stem  -  Shows  a  single  layered  epidermis  with  uniseriate,  multicellular  covering  
trichomes having 5-6 cells, occasionally a few cells collapsed; cortex consists of 10 or  
more layers of thin-walled, rectangular, parenchymatous cells; phloem consists of sieve  
elements,  thin-walled, rectangular parenchyma cells and fibres; fibres found scattered  
mostly  throughout  phloem,  in  groups  and  rarely  in  singles;  xylem  occupies  major  
portion of stem consisting of vessels, tracheids fibres and parenchyma; vessels pitted;  
fibres with pointed ends; centre occupied by nan-ow pith consisting of round to oval,  
thin-walled, parenchymatous cells. 
Leaf-
Petiole  -  shows  somewhat  cordate  outline,  consisting  of  single  layered  epidermis  
composed  of  thin-walled,  oval  cells  having  a  number  of  covering  and  glandular  
trichomes; covering trichomes multicellular 1-8 celled long,rarely slightly reflexed at  
tip; glandular trichomes short, sessile with 1-2 celled stalk and 2-8 celled balloon-
shaped head, measuring 22-27 in dia; epidermis followed by 1 or 2 layers and 2 or 3  
layers of thin-walled, elongated, parenchyma cells towards upper and lower surfaces  
respectively; three vascular bundles situated centrally, middle one larger than other two;  
xylem surrounded by phloem. 
Midrib - epidermis, trichomes and vascular bundles similar to those of petiole except  
cortical layers reduced towards apical region.
171Lamina  - epidermis and trichomes similar to those of petiole; both anomocytic and  
diacytic type of stomata present on both surfaces, slightly raised above the level of  
epidermis; palisade single layered followed by 4-6 layers of closely packed spongy  
parenchyma with chloroplast and oleo-resin; stomatal index 10-12-15 on upper surface  
and 14 - 15 - 16 on lower surface; palisade ratio 3.8; vein islet number 31 - 35. 
Powder - Greenish: shows thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, a few containing reddish  
brown contents, unicellular and rnulticellular-trichomes either entire or in pieces; thin  
walled fibres, xylem vessels with pitted thickenings, fragments of epidermal cells in  
surface view having irregular shape, oil globules, rounded to oval, simple as well as  
compound starch grains having 2-5 components, measuring 3-17 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of Tulasi oil obtained by stem distillation is carried out on Silica gel 'G'  
plate using Toluene : Ethylacetate (93:7) Tulasi oil is diluted in chloroform-toluene (1:  
10). Eugenol to be applied as standard also diluted in 130 ratio and 10 µl of each to be 
applied in band form. After running distance of 10 cm the plate is air drying for 15  
minutes and than kept in the over for 2 to 5 minutes. On cooling spray, in thoroughly va -
nillin - Sulphuric acid reagent and heat the plate at 110 ° C for 5 - 1- minutes Under  
observation. Record Rf. values of eugenol and caryophyllence. Eugenol (orange brown)  
approx. Rf. value 0.7, caryophyllence (reddish violet) runs to solvent front.
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential Oil. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana,  H¤dya,  Kaphahara,  Rucya,  V¡tahara,  Pittavardhin¢,  
Durgandhihara 
 
172IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Tribhuvanak¢rti Rasa, Mukt¡paµc¡m¤ta Rasa, Mukt¡di  
Mah¡µjana, M¡nasamitra Va¶aka 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  A¿mar¢,  áv¡sa,  Chardi,  Hikk¡,  K¡sa,  K¤miroga,  KuÀ¶ha,  
Netraroga, P¡r¿va á£la 
DOSE  - 1-3 ml of the drug in juice form.  
   1-2 g of the drug in powder form (seed). 
   
  
17373. Tulasi (Lf.) 
TULASÌ (Leaf) 
Tulas¢ consists of dried leaf of Ocimum sanctum Linn. (Fam. Lamiaceae), an erect,  
30-60 cm high, much branched annual herb, found throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Bana Tulas¢, K¤À¸atulas¢, Suras¡ 
Assamese:Tulasi 
Bengali:Tulasi 
English:Sacred Basil, Holy Basil 
Gujrati  :Tulasi, Tulsi 
Hindi    :Tulasi 
Kannada:Tulasi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Tulasi 
Marathi:Tulas 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Tulasi 
Tamil   :Thulasi, Tulasi 
Telugu  :Tulasi 
Urdu    :Raihan, Tulsi 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaves 2.5-5 cm long, 1.6-3.2 cm wide, elliptic-oblong, obtuse or acute, entire or  
serrate, pubescent on both surfaces, petiolate, thin, petiole 1.5-3 cm long, hairy; odour,  
aromatic; taste, characteristic. 
b) Microscopic 
Leaf-
Petiole - shows cordate outline, consisting of single layered epidermis composed of thin  
walled,  oval  cells  having  a  number  of  covering  and  glandular  trichomes;  covering  
trichomes  multicellular,  uniseriate  1-8  celled  long,  rarely  slightly  reflexed  at  tip;  
glandular trichomes short, sessile or with 1-2 celled stalk, and 2-8 celled, balloon-shaped  
head,  enclosed  in  a  cuticular  bladder,  measuring  22-27   µ dia.,  upper  epidermis,  
followed by 3-4 layers of collenchymatous and 1-2 layers of parenchymatous cells;  
lower  epidermis  followed  by  1-3  layers  of  collenchymatous  and  2-3  layers  of  
parenchymatous cells; three vascular bundles situated centrally, middle one larger than  
the other two, consisting of xylem and phloem. 
174Midrib - epidermis, trichomes and vascular bundles similar to those of petiole, except  
reduced in cortical layers towards apical region of midrib. 
Lamina - epidermis and trichomes similar to those of petiole on both surfaces; stomata  
anomocytic and diacytic present on both surfaces and slightly raised above the level of  
epidermis; palisade single layered followed by 4-6 layeres of closely packed spongy  
parenchyma with chloroplasts and oleo-resin; stomatal index 10-13-15 on upper surface  
and 14-15-16 on lower surface; palisade ratio 3.8; vein islet number 31-33. 
Powder - Light-green; shows fragments of polygonal, less wavy walled epidermal cells  
in surface view, covering and glandular trichomes as a whole or in pieces, palisade and  
spongy parenchyma, anomocytic and diacytic stomata. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   19   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     13   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Eth -
ylacetate (9: 1) shows in visible light nine spots at Rf. 0.03 (dark green), 0.04, 0.08 (both  
green), 0.12 (light green), 0.21, 0.33 (both green) 0.45 (yellowish green), 0.85 & 0.93  
(both light green). Under U.V. (366 nm) eight fluorescent zones appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.30,  
0.33, 0.45, 0.83 (all pink) 0.85 (blue), 0.93 (pink) & 0.98 (blue). On exposure to Iodine  
vapour eleven spots appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.08, 0.12, 0.21, 0.33, 0.45, 0.54, 0.75, 0.83, 0.88  
and 0.93 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the  
plate at 1100 Cfor ten minutes ten spots appear at Rf. 0.08 (violet), 0.12 (light violet),  
0.21 (brown), 0.33 (violet), 0.45 (violet), 0.54 (blue), 0.75 (violet), 0.83 (blue), 0.93  
(violet) and 0.98 (blue). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential Oil (Carvacrol, Caryophyllene, Nerol and Camphene  
etc.,). 
175PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pan¢, H¤dya, Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¡tahara, K¤mighna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - M¡nasamitra Va¶aka, Tribhuvana K¢rti Rasa, Mukt¡  
Paµc¡m¤t Rasa, Mah¡jvar¡´ku¿a Rasa. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Aruci, áv¡sa, Hikk¡, K¡sa, K¤miroga, KuÀ¶ha, Prati¿y¡ya, P¡r¿va¿
£la 
DOSE  - 2-3 g. of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
17674. Vacha (Rz.)  
VACË (Rhizome)  
Vac¡  consists  of  dried  rhizome  of  Acarus  calamus  Linn.  (Fam.  Araceae);  a  
semiaquatic herb, wild or cultivated throughout the country ascending upto 1800 m in the  
Himalayas.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Ugragandh¡, Ugr¡, âa·granth¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:The Sweet Flag 
Gujrati  :Ghoduvaj, Ghodvach 
Hindi    :Bach, Gora-bach 
Kannada:Baje, Narru Berua 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Vayambu 
Marathi:Vaca, Vekhandas 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Varch, Ghodavaca 
Tamil   :Vasambu, Pillai maruntho 
Telugu  :Vasa 
Urdu    :Waja-e-Turki 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug  occurs  in  simple  or  rarely  with  thumb-like  branches  at  nodes;  sub  
cylindrical to slightly flattened, somewhat tortuous or rarely straight, cut pieces of 1-5  
cm long, and 0.5-1.5 cm thick; upper side marked with alternately arranged, large,  
broadly, triangular, transverse leaf scars which almost encircle the rhizome; at nodes  
leaf sheath mostly having an appearence present; lower side shows elevated tubercular  
spots of root scars; light-brown with reddish-tinge to pinkish externally, buff coloured  
intemally; fracture, short; odour, aromatic; taste, pungent and bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Rhizome - Shows single layered epidermis; cortex composed of spherical to oblong,  
thin-walled  cells  of  various  sizes,  cells  towards  periphery,  smaller,  somewhat  
collenchymatous, more or less closely arranged cells towards inner side, rounded and  
form a network of chains of single row of cells, enclosing large air spaces, fibro-vascular  
bundles  and  secretory  cells  having  light  yellowish-brown  contents,  present  in  this  
177region; endodermis distinct; stele composed of round, parenchymatous cells enclosing  
large air  spaces similar  to those  of  cortex and several concentric vascular  bundles  
arranged in a ring towards endodermis, a few vascular bundles scattered in ground  
tissues; starch grains simple, spherical, measuring 3-6 µ in dia., present in cortex and  
ground tissue. 
Powder - Buff coloured; shows fibres, reticulate, annular vessels and simple spherical  
starch grains, measuring 3-6  µ  in diameter. 
Observation of powder and its extracts on exposure under UV light :- 
a. Powder as such: - Yellowish-cream 
b. Extracts in 
i. Petroleum ether-No change
ii. Chloroform-Light green 
iii. Methanol-Yellowish green
iv. Benzene-No change
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     16   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Volatile oil                               Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.10 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene:  
Ethylacetate (9:1) shows two spots at Rf. 0.14 (violet) and 0.73 (violet) on spraying with  
Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 105 °C. 
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Volatile Oil (principal constituents of the Volatile oil are Asamyl  
alcohol,  Eugenol  and  Asarone),  also  contains  a  bitter  principle  
Acorin (Glucoside), Starch and Tannin.
178PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pan¢, K¤mihara, Ka¸¶hya, Kaphahara, Medhya, V¡tahara, Mala M
£travi¿odhan¢, V¡mak 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Vac¡di Taila, Vac¡ La¿un¡di Taila, S¡rasvata, C£r¸a,  
S¡rasvat¡ RiÀ¶a, M¡nasmitra Va¶aka, Candra Prabh¡  
Va¶¢, Khadir¡di Va¶¢, Hinguvac¡di C£r¸a. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - á£la, Apasm¡ra, áv¡sa, K¡sa, Vibandha, Unm¡da, Ëdhm¡na,  
Kar¸a Sr¡va, Sm¤ti daurbalya. 
DOSE  - 60 -120 mg of the drug in powder form.  
       1- 2 g. of the drug in powder form for inducing vomiting.  
Note: áodhana of  Vac¡ is to be done before internal use.  
   
  
17975. Vatsanabha (Rt.)  
VATSANËBHA (Root) 
Vatsan¡bha consists of dried roots of  Aconitum chasmanthum Stapf . ex Holmes 
(Fam. Ranunculaceae); plant is an erect, perennial herb, occurs in subalpine and alpine  
zones  of  the  western  Himalayas,  in  high  plateaus  between  2000-4000  m,  roots  are  
generally collected late in September. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Amra, ViÀa Vajran¡ga, Sth¡varaviÀa, Vatsan¡gaka 
Assamese:Mithavish, Bish 
Bengali:Kathavish 
English:Aconite 
Gujrati  :Vachhanaag, Basanaag 
Hindi    :Bisa, Meethabisha, Bachhnaag, Teliya Bish 
Kannada:Basanalli, Vatsanabha, Vatsanabhi, Vachanaga 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Vatsanabhi 
Marathi:Bachnaga 
Oriya   :Tahara, Mahura, Mithvisa 
Punjabi:Mitha Visha, Mithatelia 
Tamil   :Vasanaavi, Vatsanabhi, Nabhi, Vasanabhi 
Telugu  :Vatsanaabhi, Naabhi 
Urdu    :Bachnak, Mithalelia, Beesh, Atees 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Roots  paired,  occasionally  separated  due  to  breakage,  ovoid,  conical,  small  
portions of stem sometimes attached, tapering downwards to a point, 2-4.5 cm, rarely 5  
cm long, 0.4 - 1.8 cm thick, gradually decrease in thickness towards tapering end;  
wrinkled  longitudinally  and  transversely,  rough  due  to  root  scars;  dark  brown  to  
blackish-brown; fracture, cartilaginous, hard and white within the cambium ring and  
brownish outside cambium; odour indistinct, taste, slightly bitter followed by a strong  
tingling sensation, poisonous.
b) Microscopic 
Root  -Shows epidermis 1-3 layered, suberised, papillose on outside, primary cortex  
consisting of 8-10 layers of oval to tangentially elongated, thin-walled, parenchymatous  
cells, without or with a few intercellular spaces, a few rectangular or triangular stone  
cells  in  singles  found  scattered  in  this  zone;  primary  cortex  separated  by  distinct  
180endodermis; inner bark parenchymatous, consisting of round to oval cells, containing a  
few groups of phloem strands, occupying more than half the radius; cambium having 6 -  
10 angles; xylem vessels arranged almost in a ring, some scattered, often forming 'V'  
shaped ring, enclosing  xylem  parenchyma in older  portions;  bundles  compact often  
wedge-shaped having acute apex; xylem exarch, metaxylem vessels met in centre; starch  
grains  simple  measuring  6-18   µ in  dia.  and  compound  grains  consisting  of  2-5  
components with hilum in centre, present in cortical cells, phloem parenchyma and  
xylem parenchyma. 
Powder - Light grey; shows vessels, a few aseptate fibres, and numerous simple and  
compound starch grains having hilum in the centre, single grain measuring 6-18 µ  in 
dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     24   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform:  
Methanol (90:10) shows six spots at Rf. 0.10, 0.20, 0.39, 0.56, 0.74 and 0.96 (all yellow)  
on exposure to Iodine vapour. On spraying with Dragendorff reagent two spots appear at  
Rf. 0.39 and 0.96 (both orange). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Vik¡si, Viyav¡yi, Laghu, RukÀa, UÀ¸a, ÙikÀ¸a, Yogav¡hi 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Ras¡yana, Trid°Àahara, Sv®dala, Pittasant¡pak¡raka 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Tribhuvanak¢rti  Rasa,  Anandabhairava  Rasa,  S
£tasekhara  Rasa,  V¡tavidhwansana  Rasa,  
Mah¡viÀagarbha Taila 
 
181THERAPEUTIC USES  - V¡taroga, Sannip¡ta, V¡takaphajvara, Jvar¡tis¡ra, Kanharoga. 
DOSE  -  15 - 30 mgs of the drug in powder form.  
     
Note: It is dangerous to exceed the normal dose.  
   
  
18276. Vidari (Tub.Rt.)  
VIDËRÌ (Tuberous Root)  
Vid¡r¢ consists of sliced and dried pieces of tuberous root of Pueraria tuberosa DC. 
(Fam. Fabaceae); a perennial climber with very large tuberous root, distributed nearly  
throughout the country except in very humid or very arid regions and ascending upto 1200  
m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Vid¡r¢, Vid¡rik¡, BhumikuÀm¡n·a 
Assamese:Bhedeleton, Bhuikumra 
Bengali:Vidari, Bhumikusmanda, Bhuinkumra 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Vidarikanta, Bhonykoru, Eagio, Bhoikolu, Sakharvel 
Hindi    :Vidarikanda 
Kannada:Nelagumbala  Gudde,  Nelagumbala,  Gumadi  belli,  Nelagumbula,  
Gumadigida 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Mudakku 
Marathi:Bhuikohala, Ghodvel 
Oriya   :Bhuiankakharu 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Nilapoosani 
Telugu  :Nelagummuda, Darigummadi 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug available in the form of longitudinally sliced pieces of variable size; outer  
surface reddish-brown, smooth except for protuberances at some places; cut surface  
creamish-brown, starchy and somewhat porous; usually does not break, but pliable;  
taste, sweetish. 
b) Microscopic 
Tuberous Root - Mature tuber shows 20-30 layers of cork consisting of rectangular, thin-
walled, tangentially elongated and radially arranged cells filled with dark reddish-brown  
content except in a few inner layers; secondary cortex consists of 6-15 layers of circular,  
oval to rectangular and tangentially elongated, thin-walled cells, yellow band of 2-6  
layers of compactly arranged stone cells present towards inner side of cortex; stone cells  
moderately thick-walled, varying in shape and size and having well marked striations  
183and pits; a number of prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate found in parenchymatous  
cells, and also rarely in stone cells; secondary phloem consists of sieve elements and  
phloem parenchyma having a number of strands of phloem fibres and a few stone cells;  
sieve elements somewhat collapsed in outer region forming tangential bands; phloem  
fibres much elongated, highly thickened, lignified with narrow lumen; a number of  
tanniniferous ducts filled with brown content, distributed throughout this region; xylem  
forms whole of inner white spongy zone, consisting of several concentric rings of one or  
a few xylem vessels associated with a few xylem elements; vessels mostly drum-shaped  
having reticulate thickening; xylem rays multi seriate and well marked consisting of thin  
walled, radially elongated cells, a few latex duct also present; plenty of starch grains  
mostly simple, somewhat round, angular to oval, having central hilum and striations,  
measuring 5.5 - 13.75 µ in dia. present in all parenchymatous cells. 
Powder - Buff coloured; shows plenty of starch grains with central hilum and striations  
measuring 5.5 - 13.75 µ in dia., fragments of cork, prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate,  
a few xylem vessels with reticulate thickening and phloem fibres. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   17   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     24   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Gluconic and Malic acids. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :áukrala,  Balya,  M£trala,  Pittahara,  Ras¡yana,  Svarya,  V¡tahara,  
Var¸ya, Stanyada, J¢van¢ya, B¤Æhan¢ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Marma Gu¶ik¡, Vid¡ry¡dikv¡tha C£r¸a, Vid¡ry¡di Gh
¤ta, Manmath¡bhra Rasa, P£gakha¸·a (Aparah). 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - D¡ha, Raktapitta, Angmarda, Daurbalya, áoÀa. 
DOSE  - 3-6 g. of the drug in powder form.  
   
18477. Yava (Fr.)  
YAVA (Fruit)  
Yava consists of dried fruit of  Hordeum vulgare Linn. Syn. H. sativum Pers. (Fam.  
Poaceae); an annual, erect herb, 50-100 cm high, cultivated chiefly in North India. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Dh¡nyar¡ja, T¢kÀ¸a¿uka, HayeÀ¶¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Jau, Jav 
English:Barley 
Gujrati  :Cheno, Jau 
Hindi    :Jav 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Javegambu 
Marathi:Yava, Java 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Javo 
Tamil   :Barley 
Telugu  :Barlibiyam, Yava Dhanya 
Urdu    :Jau 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit a caryopsis, elliptic, oblong, ovoid-and tapering at both ends, smooth, about  
1 cm long and 0.2-0.3 cm wide, dorsally compressed and flattened on the sides with a  
shallow longitudinal furrow, 3-5 ridges having shallow depression between them, grains  
tightly enclosed and adhering the lemma and palea; pale-greenish-yellow; odour, not  
distinct; taste, sweetish-acrid.
b) Microscopic 
Fruit -Shows single layered epidermis consisting of crescent-shaped, round to oval wavy  
walled cells, followed by 2-3 layers, thick-walled, sclerenchymatous fibres; below the  
sclerenchyma  are  present  irregular,  square  or  quadrilateral,  spongy  parenchymatous  
cells, a few cell walls having silica bodies through which run the fibro-vascular bundles  
of the ribs, followed by more or less, polygortal inner epidermal cells, a few inner  
epidermal cells having unicellular claw-shaped hair and stomata; pericarp composed of  
cells  with  more  or  less  compressed  parenchymatous  cells;  seed  coat  appears  as  a  
colourless line; perisperm composed of cells with more or  less wavy walls having  
185narrow lumens; endosperm divided into two zones, 2-4 cells deep aleurone layers, and  
the rest starch layers; starch grains simple, round to oval, measuring 3-30  µ in diameter. 
Powder -  Creamish-white;  shows  groups  of  fragments  of  polygonal,  thin-walled  
flowering glume cells in surface view, sclerenchymatous fibres, scalariform vessels and  
abundant round to oval, simple starch grains, measuring 3-30 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Water-soluble ash                       Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.5 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2.5  per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than      5.5  per cent, Appendix   2.2.7 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : 
Acetic acid: Water (4: 1 :5) shows under U.V. light (366 nm) seven fluorescent zones at  
Rf. 0.10, 0.22, 0.31, 0.45, 0.68, 0.83 (all violet) and 0.92 (yellow). On spraying with  
Phosphomolybdic acid reagent and on heating the plate for ten minutes at 105 °C six 
spots appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.22, 0.31, 0.68, 0.83 and 0.92 (all grey). On spraying with  
Ninhydrin reagent eleven spots appear at Rf. 0.06, 0.14, 0.16, 0.24, 0.31, 0.36, 0.44,  
0.53, 0.56, 0.65 & 0.72 (all pink.) 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Starch, Sugars, Fats, Proteins (Albumin, Globulin, Prolamin and  
Glutilin) also contains Flavone Glycosides viz, Orientoside,  
Orientin, Vitexin etc. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :M¤du, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Balya, Kaphahara, Lekhana, M£trahara, Medahara, Pittahara, Pur¢Àak
¤t, Sthairyakara, Svarya, V¡tak¤t, V¤Àya, Var¸ya 
 
186IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - D¡dhika  Gh¤ta,  Agastyahar¢tak¢  Ras¡yana,  El¡dya  
Modaka, Dh¡nvantara Gh¤ta, Gandharvahasta Taila,  
Dh¡nvantara  Taila,  B¤hatm¡Àa  Taila,  Sarsap¡di  
Pralepa, K¡yasth¡dya Vartti. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - áv¡sa, K¡sa, Medoroga, P¢nasa, Prameha, T¤À¸¡, Urustambha,  
Kanharoga, Tvagroga 
DOSE  - 100 - 200 g. of the drug. 
   
  
18778. Yavasaka (W.P.) 
YAVËSAKA (Whole Plant)  
Yav¡saka consists of dried whole plant of Alhagi pseudalhagi (Bieb). Desv. (Fam.  
Fabaceae); a small thorny shrub, mostly found in arid and dry regions of Gujarat, Punjab,  
Utter Pradesh and Rajasthan.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Yav¡sa, Y¡sa, Yav¡saka 
Assamese:Bhatuashak 
Bengali:-- 
English:Persian Manna Plant 
Gujrati  :Javaso 
Hindi    :Javasa 
Kannada:Turuchana gida, Javasa, Neladangara, ballidurabi, Duralabha 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Venkatithura, Valiya Kotithuva 
Marathi:Dhamasa 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:--- 
Tamil   :Punaikanjuri, Kanchori 
Telugu  :Chinnadoolagondi, Dhanvayasamu 
Urdu    :Turanjabeen 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Well developed, 20-30 cm long and 0.2-1 cm thick; gradually tapering, secondary  
and tertiary root absent; dark brown; fracture, short. 
b) Microscopic 
Stem - Cylindrical, glabrous, slightly rough at basal region with slender; hard, sharp  
axillary spines upto 3.8 cm long; branched, terete, striate, glabrous, nearly 0.1-1 cm  
thick; yellowish-green to yellowish-brown. 
Leaf - Simple, alternate, oblong, mucronate obtuse, drooping, opposite, extipulate, 0.5-1  
cm  long, 0.5-0.7 cm broad. elliptical, smooth or puberulous with very short petiole,  
stipules green; no taste and odour. 
Root -Shows 6-10 layers of tangentially elongated, radially arranged cork cells; cork  
cambium single layered, filled with reddish-brown contents; secondary cortex almost  
188absent; phloem composed of sieve elements, phloem parenchyma and phloem fibres;  
some phloem parenchyma cells filled with tannin; xylem consists of vessels, tracheids,  
fibres parenchyma and xylem rays; vessels mostly solitary with simple pits; tracheids  
and fibres thick-walled, ascptate with bluntly pointed ends; medullary rays 1-4 cells  
wide, 3-45 cells long; pith composed of a few thin-walled, angular, parenchymatous  
cells; starch grains simple, rounded to oval, 5.5-14.75 µ in dia. present throughout the  
region.
Stem - Shows a single layered epidermis covered externally with thick cuticle; cortex  
composed of 8-15 layers of oval, tangentially elongated cells, numerous tanniniferous  
cells found scattered in this region; pericycle present in form of fibre groups; phloem  
composed of sieve elements, parenchyma and fibres; some parenchyma cells filled with  
tannin; xylem consists of vessels, tracheids, xylem fibres, xylem parenchyma and xylem  
rays; vessels solitary or in groups of 2-3 with simple pits; tracheids and fibres, a few  
with thick wall and simple pits; medullary rays 2-3 cells wide pith composed of rounded,  
thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, some cells filled with tannin. 
Leaf-
Petiole - appears circular in outline; shows single layered epidermis covered externally  
with cuticle; hypodermis 2-3 layered, filled with tannin, 'D'' shaped collateral vascular  
bundle present in central region; rest of tissue between vasculr bundle and hypodermis  
composed of thin-walled, parenchymtous cells some of which are filled with tannin. 
Midrib - appears biconvex in outline; epidermis single layered, covered externally with  
thick cuticle; hypodermis 1-2 layered, filled with tannin; pericycle present in the form of  
fibres strands; vascular bundle collateral; xylem situated above phlome, rest of tissue  
between vascular bundle and pericyclic strand is parenchymatous. 
Lamina  - epidermis consisting of single layered cells, covered with cuticle; paracytic  
stomata present on both surfaces hypodermis single layered filler vith tannin; mesophyll  
not differentiated into palisade and spongy parenchyma, consisting of thin-walled oval  
to polygonal cells having chlorophyll; rounded to elongated tanniniferous cells found  
scattered in mesophyll. 
Powder - Greenish-brown; shows fragments of epidermal cells consisting of rectangular  
to  polygonal,  elongated,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells  with  paracytic  stomata,  
pitted vessels, fibres, tanniniferous cells, simple, round and oval starch grains measuring  
5.5- 14.75 µ in diameter. 
189IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   13.5 per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sugars (Melizitose, Sucrose, Invert Sugars). 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Sara 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balak¤t, D¢pana, Kaphahara, Pittahara 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Chinnodbhav¡di  Kv¡tha  C£r¸a,  Gandharvahast¡di  
Kv¡tha  C£r¸a,  Bh¡rangy¡di  Kv¡tha  C£r¸a,  
Arimed¡di Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Chardi, Jvara, K¡sa, Raktapitta, T¤À¸¡, V¡tarakta, Visarpa 
DOSE  - 20 - 50 g. of the drug in powder form for decoction. 
  
190THE AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA  
OF INDIA
PART- I
VOLUME – III
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
DEPARTMENT OF ISM & H
Contents   |   Monographs   |   Abbrevations   |   Appendices
Legal Notices   |   General Notices
Note: This e-Book contains  Computer Database generated Monographs which are reproduced from official publication. The  
order of contents under the sections of Synonyms, Rasa, Guna, Virya, Vipaka, Karma, Formulations, Therapeutic uses may be 
shuffled, but the contents are same from the original source. However, in case of doubt, the user is advised to refer the official  
book.
 i 
CONTENTS
Legal Notices
General Notices
MONOGRAPHS
S.No. Plant Name Botanical NamePage No.
(asper book)
1ËÚHAKÌ (Root) Cajanus cajan (Linnn) Millsp. 1
2AGNlMANTHA (Root) Clerodendrum phlomidis Linn 3
3AMBAâÙHAKÌ (Root) Hiniscus sabdariffa Linn 5
4ËMRA (Seed) Mangifera indica Linn. 7
5ËMRA (Stem Bark) Mangifera indica Linn. 9
6ËMRËTA (Stem) Spondias pinnata (Linn.f.) Kurz. 11
7APËMËRGA (Root) Achyranthus aspera Roxb. 13
8ARALU (Stem Bark) Ailanthus excelsa (Roxb). 15
9ARKA (Stem Bark) Calotropis procera (Ait.) R.Br. 17
10ASANA (Stem Bark) Pterocarpus marsupium Roxb. 19
11ASTHISAMHÎTA (Stem) Cissus quadrangularis Linn. 21
12ËTMAGUPTË (Seed) Mucuna prurita Hook. 23
13BHËRA×GÌ (Root) Clerodedron serratum Linn. 25
14BÌJAPÍRA (Fresh Fruit) Citrus medica Linn. 27
15BILVA (Root) Aegle marmelos Corr. 29
16BIMBÌ(Whole plant) Coccinia indica W& A. 32
17CË×GERÌ (Whole Plant) Oxalis corniculata Linn. 36
18CIRABILVA (Fruit) Holoptelea integrifolia Planch. 39
19DANTÌ  (Root) Baliospermum montanum Muell- Arg.41
20DHATTÍRA (Seed) Datura metel Linn. 43
21DRËKâË  (Fruit) Vitis vinifera Linn. 45
22DÍRVË (Root) Cynodon dactylon (Linn ) Pers. 47
23ERAÛÚA (Fresh Leaf) Ricinus communis Linn. 49
24ERAÛÚA (Seed) Ricinus communis Linn. 51
 ii 25GAMBHËRÌ (Stem) Gmelina arborea Roxb. 53
26GOJIHVË (Aerial Part) Onosma bracteatum Wall. 55
27GRANTHIPARÛÌ (Root) Leonotis nepetaefolia R.Br. 58
28HAêSAPADÌ (Whole Plant) Adiantum lunulatum Burm. 60
29HAPUâË (Fruit) Juniperus communis Linn. 63
30INDRAVËRUÛÌ (Fruit) Citrullus colocynthis Schrad. 65
31INDRAYAVA (Seed) Holorrhena antidysenterica Wall. 67
32ÌáVARÌ (Root) Aristolochia indica Linn. 69
33JËTÌ (Leaf) Jasminum officinale Linn. 71
34KADALÌ (Rhizome) Musa paradisica Linn. 73
35KËKAJA×GHË (Root) Perstrophe bicalyculata Linn. 75
36KËKANËSIKË (Seed) Martynia annua Linn. 77
37KËKOLÌ (Tuberous Root) Lilium polyphyllum D.Don. 79
38KAMALA (Rhizome) Nelumbo nucifera Gaertn. 81
39KARAVÌRA (Root) Nerium indicum Mill. 84
40KARAMARDA (Root) Carissa carandas Linn. 86
41KËáA  (Root Stock) Saccharaum spontaneum Linn. 88
42KAÙPHALA  (Fruit)Myrica esculenta Buch-Ham. Ex.  
D.Don.90
43KAÙPHALA  (Stem Bark)Myrica esculenta Buch-Ham. Ex.  
D.Don92
44KOLA (Fruit Pulp) Zyzyphus jujuba Lam. 94
45KOLA (Steam Bark) Zyzyphus jujuba Lam. 96
46KOâËTAKÌ  (Whole Plant) Luffa acutangula  (Linn) Roxb. 98
47KUMUDË (Flower) Nymphaea alba Linn. 102
48KUáA  (Root Stock) Desmostachya bippanata Staph. 104
49LË×GALÌ  (Tuberous Root) Gloriosa superba Linn. 106
50LAáUNA (Bulb) Allium sativum Linn. 108
51MAHËBALË (Root) Sida rhombifolia Linn. 110
 iii 52MAØJIâÙHË (Stem) Rubia cordifolia Linn. 112
53MARICA (Fruit) Piper nigrum Linn. 115
54MËâAPARÛÌ  (Whole Plant) Teramnus labialis Spreng. 118
55MASÍRA  (Seed) Lens culinaris Medic. 121
56MUDGA (Seed) Phaseolus radiatus Linn. 123
57MÍLAKA  (Seed) Raphanus sativus Linn. 125
58MUÛÚÌTIKË (Leaf) Sphaeranthus indicus Linn. 127
59MUSTË  (Rhizome) Cyperus rotundus Linn. 129
60NËGAVALLÌ (Leaf) Piper betle Linn. 131
61NËRIKELA  (Endosperm) Cocos nucifera Linn. 134
62NICULA (Fruit)Brringtonia acutangula (Linn.)  
Gaertn.136
63NÌLÌ (Whole Plant) Indigofera tinctoria Linn. 138
64NIRGUÛÚÌ (Leaf) Vitex negundo Linn. 142
65PADMAKA (Heart Wood) Prunus cerasoides D.Don. 145
66PËÙALË (Root) Stereospermum suaveolens DC. 147
67PHALGU (Fruit) Ficus hispida Linn. 149
68PHALGU (Root) Ficus hispida Linn. 151
69PRAPUNNËÚA (Seed) Cassia tora Linna. 153
70RAKTACANDANA (Heart Wood) Pterocarpus santalinus Linn. 155
71RAKTAPUNËRNAVA (Root) Boerhaavia diffusa Linn. 157
72RËMAáITALIKË (Whole Plant) Amaranthus tricolor Linn. 159
73RËSNË (Leal) Pluchea lanceolata Oliver & Hiem. 162
74SAHACARA (Whole Plant) Barlaria prionitis Linn. 165
75SAHADEVI (Whole Plant) Vernonia cinerea Liees. 169
76áAILEYA (Lichen) Parmelia perlata (Huds.) Ach. 172
77áËKA (Heart Wood) Tectona grandis Linn.F. 174
78áËKHOÙAKA (Stem Bark) Streblus asper Lour. 176
79SËLAPARÛÌ (Root) Desmodum gangeticum DC. 178
 iv 80SËLÌ (Fruit) Oryza sativa Linn. 181
81áËLMALI (Stem Bark) Bombax ceiba Linn. 183
82áAÛA (Seed) Crotalaria juncea Linn. 185
83áËRA (Root) Saccharuam bengalense Retz. 187
84SARALA (Heart Wood) Pinus roxburghii Sargent. 189
85SARALA (Root) Pinus roxburghii Sargent. 191
86SARâAPA (Seed) Brassica campestris Linn. 193
87SATAPATRIKË  (Flower) Rosa centifolia Linn. 195
88áIêáAPË (Heart Wood) Dalbergia sissoo Roxb. 197
89áIêáAPË (Stem Bark) Dalbergia sissoo Roxb. 199
90áIRÌâA (Stem Bark) Albizzia lebbeck Bent. 201
91STHAUÛEYA (Leaf) Taxus baccata Linn. 203
92SÍRAÛA (Corm)Amorphophallus campanulatus 
(Roxb.) Blume.205
93áVETACANDANA (Heart Wood) Santalum album Linn. 207
94áYONËKA (Root) Oroxylum indicum Vent. 209
95TËLA (Inflorescence) Borassus flabellifer Linn. 211
96TRIVRT (Root)Operculina turpenthum (Linn.) 
Silva Manso.213
97TUMBINÌ (Fresh Fruit) Lagenaria siceraria (Mol.) Standl. 215
98UDUMBARA (Fruit) Ficus glomerata Roxb. 217
99UáIRË (Root) Vetiveria zizaniodes (Linn.) Nash. 219
100UTPALA (Flower) Nymphaea stellata Willd. 221
 v Appendix-1
1.1 Apparatus for Tests and Assays
1.1.1 - Nessler Cylinder
1.1.2 - Sieves
1.1.2 - Thermometers
1.1.4 - Volumetric Glassware
1.1.5 - Weights and Balances
Appendix-2
2.1 Testing Drugs
2.1.1 - Systematic Study of Crude Drugs
2.1.2 - Microscopic methods of Examining Crude Vegetable Drugs
2.1.3 - Types of Stomata 
2.1.4 - Determination of Stomatal Index
2.1.5 - Determination of Palisade Ratio
2.1.6 - Determination of Vein –Islet Number
2.1.7 - Determination of Stomatal Number
2.2 Determination of Quantitative Data of Vegetable Drugas
2.2.1 - Sampling of drugs
2.2.2 - Foreign Matter and Determination of Foreign matter
2.2.3 - Determination of Total Ash 
2.2.4 - Determination of Acid Insoluble Ash 
2.2.5 - Determination of Water Soluble Ash
2.2.6 - Determination of Alcohol soluble Extractive
2.2.7 - Determination of Water Soluble Extractive
2.2.8 - Determination o of Ether Soluble Extractive (Fixed Oil Content)
2.2.9 - Determination of Moisture Content (Loss on Drying)
2.2.10 - Determination of Volatile Oil in Drugs
2.2.11 - Special Processes used in Alkaloidal Assays
2.2.11-a - Continuous Extraction of Drugs
2.2.11-b - Tests for Complete Extraction of Alkaloids
2.2.12 - Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC)
2.3 Limit Tests
2.3.1 - Limit Test for Arsenic
2.3.2 - Limit Test for Chlorides
2.3.3 - Limit Test for Heavy Metals
2.3.4 - Limit Test for Iron 
2.3.5 - Limit Test for lead
2.3.6 - Sulphated Ash
2.3.7 - Limit Test for Sulphates
 vi Appendix-3
3.1 Physical Tests and determinations
2.3.1 - Powder Fineness
2.3.2 - Refractive Index
2.3.3 - Weight per milliliter and Specific Gravity 
Appendix-4
4.1 Reagents and Solutions
Appendix-5
5.1 - Weights and Measures
5.2 - Approximate Equivalents of Doses in Indian System and Metric System
Appendix- 6
Classical Ayurvedic References
Index
English equivalents of Ayurvedic clinical conditions and diseases 
Definition of  Rasa
Guna
Vipaka
Virya
 vii LEGAL NOTICES
In India there are laws dealing with drugs that are the subject of monographs  
which follow. These monographs should be read subject to the restrictions imposed  
by these laws wherever they are applicable.
It is expedient that enquiry be made in each case in order to ensure that the  
provisions of the law are being complied with.
In general, the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 (subsequently amended in 1964  
and 1982), the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 and the Poisons Act, 1919 and the rules  
framed thereunder should be consulted.
              Under the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India  
(A.P.I.), Part-I, Vol. III, is the book of standards for single drugs included therein and  
the standards prescribed in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, Part-I, Vol. III  
would be official. If considered necessary these standards can be amended and the  
Chairman of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee authorised to issue such  
amendments.  Whenever  such  amendments  are  issued  the  Ayurvedic  
Pharmacopoeia of India, Part-I, Vol. III, would be deemed to have been amended  
accordingly.
 viii GENERAL NOTICES
Title - The title of the book is “ Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of 
Name of the Drugs - The name given on the top of each monograph of the drug is in  
Sanskrit as mentioned in the  Ayurvedic classics and/or in the  Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India , Part-I and Part-II will be considered official. These names have been arranged in  
English alphabetical order. The Latin name (taxonomical nomenclature) of each drug as  
found  in authentic  scientific  literature has  been provided  in the monograph  in  the  
introductory paragraph. The official name will be the main title of the drug and its  
scientific name will also be considered as legal name.
Introductory Para  - Each monograph begins with an introductory paragraph indicating  
the part, scientific name of the drug in Latin with short description about its habit,  
distribution and method of collection, if any.
Synonyms - Synonyms of each drug appearing in each monograph in Sanskrit, English,  
Hindi, Urdu and other Indian regional languages have been mentioned as found in the  
classical texts,  Ayurvedic Formulary of India, Part-I and Part-II as procured from the  
experts, scholars of Ayurveda and officials in the field from different states.
Italics - Italic type has been used for scientific name of the drug appearing in the  
introductory  paragraph  of  each  monograph  as  also  for  chemicals  and  reagents,  
substances or processes described in Appendix.
Odour and Taste - Wherever a specific odour has been found it has been mentioned  
but the description as ‘ odourless’ or ‘no odour’ has in many cases been avoided in the  
description,  as large numbers of drugs have got no specific  odour. The “odour” is 
examined by directly smelling 25 g of the powdered drug contained in a package or  
freshly powdered. If the odour is discernible the sample is rapidly transferred to an open  
container and re-examined after 15 minutes. If the odour persists to be discernible, it is  
described as having odour.
The “Taste” of a drug is examined by taking a small quantity of 85 mesh powder  
by a tip of moist glass rod and applying it on tongue previously rinsed with water. This  
may not be done in case if poisonous drugs, indicated in monograph.
Mesh Number - Wherever the powdering of the drug has been required the sieve “Mesh  
Number 85” has been used. This will not apply for drugs containing much oily substance.  
Weights and Measures -  The metric system of weights and measures is employed.  
Weights are given in multiples or fractions of a gramme (g) or of a milligram (mg). Fluid  
measures are given in multiples or fractions of millilitre (ml).
When the term “drop” is used, the measurement is to be made by means of a  
tube, which delivers in 20 drops 1 gram of distilled water at 15oC.
Metric measures are required by the Pharmacopoeia to be graduated at 20oC and 
all  measurements  involved  in  the  analytical  operations  of  the  Pharmacopoeia  are  
intended, unless otherwise stated to be made at that temperature.
Identity, Purity and Strength - Under the heading “Identification” tests are provided  
as an aid to identification and are described in their respective monographs.
The term “Foreign Matter” is used to designate any matter, which does not form  
part of the drug as defined in the monograph. Vegetable drugs used as such or in  
formulations, should be duly identified and authenticated and be free from insects,  
 ix pests, fungi, micro-organisms, pesticides, and other animal matter including animal  
excreta, be within the permitted and specified limits for lead, arsenic and heavy metals,  
and  show  no  abnormal  odour,  colour,  sliminess,  mould  or  other  evidence  of  
deterioration.
The  quantitative  tests  e.g.  total  ash,  acid-insoluble  ash,  water-soluble  ash,  
alcohol-soluble extractive, water- soluble extractive, ether-soluble extractive, moisture  
content, volatile oil content and assays are the methods upon which the standards of  
Pharmacopoeia  depend.  The  methods  for  assays  are  described  in  their  respective  
monographs and for other quantitative tests, methods are not repeated in the text of  
monographs but only the corresponding reference of appropriate appendix is given. The  
analyst is not precluded from employing an alternate method in any instance if he is  
satisfied  that  the  method,  which  he  uses,  will  give  the  same  result  as  the  
Pharmacopoeial Method.  In  suitable  instances  the  methods  of  microanalysis,  if  of  
equivalent accuracy, may be substituted for the tests and assays described. However, in  
the event of doubt or dispute the methods of analysis of the Pharmacopoeia are alone  
authoritative.
Limits for Heavy Metals  – All Ayurvedic Drugs (Single/Compound formulation) must  
comply with the limits for Heavy Metals prescribed in individual Monograph and wherever  
limit is not given then they must comply with the limits given in WHO publication  
“Quality Control Methods for Medicinal Plants and Material”.
Standards - For statutory purpose, statements appearing in the API, Part-I, Vol. V,  
under Description, those of definition of the part and source plants, and Identity, Purity  
and Strength, shall constitute standards. 
Thin Layer Chromatography ( T.L.C.) - Under this head, wherever given, the number  
of spots and Rf values of the spots with their colour have been mentioned as a guide for  
identification of the drug and not as Pharmacopoeial requirement. However, the analyst  
may use any other solvent system and detecting reagent in any instance if he is satisfied  
that the method which he uses, even by applying known reference standards, will give  
better result to establish the identity of any particular chemical constituent reported to  
be present in the drug.
Quantities to be weighed for Assays and Tests - In all description quantity of the  
substance to be taken for testing is indicated. The amount stated is approximate but the  
quantity actually used must be accurately weighed and must not deviate by more than  
10 per cent from the one stated.
Constant Weight -  the term “Constant Weight” when it refers to drying or ignition  
means that two consecutive weighings do not differ by more than 1.0 mg per g of the  
substance taken for the determination, the second weighing following an additional hour  
of drying on further ignition.
Constituents - Under this head only the names of important chemical constituents,  
groups of constituents reported in research publications have been mentioned as a guide  
and not as pharmacopoeial requirement.
Percentage of Solutions -  In defining standards, the expression per cent (%), is used,  
according to circumstances, with one of the four meanings given below.
Per cent w/w (percentage weight in weight) expresses the number of grammes of 
active substance, in 100 grammes of product.        
Per cent w/v (Percentage weight in volume) expresses the number of grammes of 
active substance in 100 millilitres of product.        
 x Per cent v/v (percentage volume in volume) expresses the number of millilitres of 
active substance in 100 millilitres of product.        
         Per cent v/w (percentage volume in weight) expresses the number of millilitres of 
active substance in 100 grammes of product. 
Percentage of alcohol  - All statements of percentage of alcohol ( C2H5OH) refer to 
percentage by volume at 15.56 oC.        
Temperature - Unless otherwise specified all temperatures refer to centigrade ( celsius), 
thermometric scale.
Solutions - Unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph, all solutions are  
prepared with purified water.
Reagents  and  Solutions  -  The  chemicals  and  reagents  required  for  the  test  in  
Pharmacopoeia are described in Appendices.
Solubility - When stating the solubilities of Chemical substances the term “Soluble” is  
necessarily sometimes used in a general sense irrespective of concomitant chemical  
changes.
Statements of solubilities, which are expressed as a precise relation of weights of  
dissolved substance of volume of solvent, at a stated temperature, are intended to apply  
at that temperature. Statements of approximate  solubilities for which no figures are  
given, are intended to apply at ordinary room temperature.         
Pharmacopoeial chemicals when dissolved may show slight physical impurities,  
such as fragment of filter papers, fibres, and dust particles, unless excluded by definite  
tests in the individual monographs.
When the expression “parts” is used in defining the solubility of a substance, it is  
to be understood to mean that 1 gramme of a solid or 1 millilitre of a liquid is soluble in  
that number of millilitres of the solvent represented by the stated number of parts.
When  the  exact  solubility  of  pharmacopoeial substance  is  not  known,  a  
descriptive term is used to indicate its solubility. 
The following table indicates the meaning of such terms :-
Descriptive terms Relative quantities of solvent  
Very soluble Less than 1 part
Freely soluble From 1 to 10 parts
Soluble From 10 to 30 parts
Sparingly soluble From 30 to 100 parts
Slightly soluble From 100 to 1000 parts
Very slightly soluble From 1000 to 10,000 parts
Practically insoluble More than 10,000 parts
Therapeutic  uses  and  important  formulations  –Therapeutic  uses and important  
formulations  mentioned  in  this  Pharmacopoeia  are,  as  provided  in  the  recognised 
Ayurvedic classics and in the Ayurvedic Formulary of India, Part –I and Part-II.
Doses – The doses mentioned in each monograph are in metric system of weights,  
which are the approximate conversions from classical weights mentioned in Ayurvedic  
 xi texts. A conversion table is appended giving classical weights of Ayurvedic System of  
Medicine with their metric equivalents. Doses mentioned in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia  
of  India  (A.P.I.)  are  intended  merely  for  general  guidance  and  represent,  unless  
otherwise stated, the average range of quantities per dose which is generally regarded  
suitable by clinicians for adults only when administered orally.        
   
It is to be noted that the relation between doses in metric and Ayurvedic systems 
set forth in the text is of approximate equivalence. These quantities are for convenience  
of prescriber and sufficiently accurate for pharmaceutical purposes.
         The abbreviations commonly employed are as follows:                                         
      
Abbreviations of technical terms
m. Metre
l. Litre
mm. Millimetre
cm. Centimetre
µ. Micron (0.001 mm)
Kg. Kilogram
g. Gramme
mg. Milligram
ml. Millilitre
IN. Normal solution
0.5 N. Half-normal solution
0.1 N. Decinormal solution
1M. Molar solution
Fam. Family
PS. Primary Standards
TS. Transverse Section
Abbreviations used for Languages
Sansk. Sanskrit
Assam. Assamese
Beng. Bengali
Eng. English
Guj. Gujrati
Kan. Kannada
Kash. Kashmiri
Mal. Malayalam
Mar. Marathi
Ori. Oriya
Punj. Punjabi
Tam. Tamil
Tel. Telugu
 xii ABBREVIATIONS FOR PARTS OF PLANTS
Cotyledon Cotldn.
Flower Fl.
Fruit Fr.
Heart Wood Ht. Wd.
Leaf Lf.
Pseudo-bulb Pseudo-bulb
Root Bark Rt. Bk.
Root Rt.
Rhizome Rz.
Seed Sd.
Stem Bark St. Bk.
Stem St.
Tuberous Root Tub. Rt.
Wood Wd.
Whole Plant Wh. Pl.
 xiii 1. Adhaki (Rt.) 
ËÚHAKÌ (Root)
Ë·hak¢ consists of dried root of Cajanus cajan (Linn.) Millsp. (Fam. Fabaceae);  
an annual or perennial, erect shrub, 1.2-3.1 m high, cultivated almost throughout as a  
pulse crop upto an altitude of 1830 m in the Himalayas. It is mainly grown in Uttar  
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu. 
SYNONYMS  -
Sansk:Tuvar¢
Assam:Ruharmah 
Beng:Adar, Aaharee, Arhar
Eng:Pigeon Pea, Red Gram
Guj:Tuvar, Tuvera, Tur, Tuver
Hindi:Arahad, Arahar
Kan:Togari, Tovaree, Togari, Kari Uddu, Togaribele
Kash:--
Mal:Thuvara, Tuvara
Mar:Toor, Toori, Tura
Ori:Harada, Kandulagachha
Punj:Arhar
Tam:Tovarai, Thovary, Adagi Tuvari, Thuvarai, Tuvarai, Thovarai
Tel:Kandulu, Kadulu
Urdu:Arhar
DESCRIPTION  -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root stout, branched, cylindrical, tapering having a number of secondary roots  
and rootlets, surface rough due to transversely running light brown lenticels, cream to  
light yellow externally, dirty white internally; fracture, hard and fibrous; odour, charac -
teristic; taste, acrid.
b)  Microscopic:
Mature root shows 3-7 layers of cork of rectangular, tangentially elongated, thin  
walled cells, interrupted at certain places by lenticels; secondary cortex consists of outer  
3-7 layers of thin-walled, somewhat tangentially elongated parenchymatous cell, fol -
lowed by a row of oval to elongated stone cells, thick-walled, elliptical, with wide  
lumen;  some  adjoining  parenchymatous  cells  contain  prismatic  crystals  of  calcium  
oxalate; in the inner region strands of isolated or groups of 2-12 lignified fibres present;  
secondary phloem consists of sieve elements, fibres and phloem parenchyma, traversed  
by phloem rays; phloem fibres lignified, variable in size with pointed tips and wide  
lumen scattered throughout phloem region in single or in groups; some stone cells,  
mostly  in  groups  and  possessing  yellowish  contents,  also  found  scattered  in  inner  
 1 phloem; phloem rays numerous, uni to triseriate and straight; ray cells rectangular to  
rounded in inner phloem region, rounded to tangentially elongated in outer phloem;  
cambium  consisting  of  4-6  rows  of  thin-walled,  narrow,  tangentially  elongated  
colourless cells; xylem occupies bulk of root and composed of vessels, tracheids, xylem  
parenchyma and fibres; vessels of varying sizes having pitted walls occur in small  
groups of 2-3 and also as occasionally isolated units in larger groups of 4-7; fibres short  
with wide lumen and pointed tips; parenchyma thin walled and rectangular; xylem rays  
numerous, uni to triseriate, biseriate being more common, straight, 3-25 cells high,  
radially elongated. 
Powder - Cream coloured; shows numerous pieces of pitted vessels, fibres, cork cells,  
sclereids and a few prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than3.5Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.7Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 4Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Ethylacetate : Methanol  
(90 : 10) v/v shows under U.V. (366 nm) six fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.06, 0.20, 0.69,  
0.80, 0.90 (all blue) and 0.92 (yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic Sulphuric acid  
six spots appear on heating the plate at 105 °C for about ten minutes at Rf. 0.06, 0.22,  
0.30, 0.80, 0.88 and 0.92 (all grey). 
CONSTITUENTS - Saponins and Reducing Sugars .
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :V¡takara,  Pittahara,  Kaphahara,  Gr¡h¢,  Var¸ya,  Rucikara,  
ViÀaghna 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Mah¡pa´cagavya Gh¤ta, Ka´k¡yana Gu¶ik¡
THERAPEUTIC USES -  Raktavik¡ra
DOSE  - 2-6 g. of the drug in powder form. 
 2 2. Agnimantha (Rt.)
AGNlMANTHA (Root)
Agnimantha consists of dried mature roots of  Clerodendrum phlomidis  Linn. 
(Fam. Verbenaceae); a large shrub or small tree reaching upto 9 m in height, with more  
or less pubescent branches, found in dry parts throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Ga¸ik¡rik¡; Jay¡, Jayant¢
Assam.:--
Beng.:Ganiyari, Arani, Goniari 
Eng.:--
Guj.:Arani, Aranimula, Arni
Hindi.:Urni
Kan.:Taggi, Taggi Beru
Kash.:--
Mal.:Munja
Mar.:Takalimula
Ori.:Ganiary
Punj.:--
Tam.:Tazhutazhai
Tel.:Taluki
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug pieces 7-15 cm long, 0.2 -3.0 cm thick, occasionally branched, cylindrical,  
tough, yellowish-brown externally, bark thin, occasionally easily peeled, outer surface  
rough due to exfoliation, wood light yellow, fracture hard; taste, slightly astringent. 
b)  Microscopic:
Root shows exfoliating cork, consisting of 10-15, occasionally more, rows of  
tangentially elongated, thin-walled cells; secondary cortex consists of round to oval  
parenchymatous  cells,  a  few  containing  rhomboidal  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  
secondary phloem consists of isodiametric, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, a few of  
them containing rhomboidal crystals of calcium oxalate; phloem rays distinct, consisting  
of radially elongated cells; secondary xylem shows a wide zone, consisting of usual  
elements, all being lignified; vessels found  in single  as well  as in groups  of  2-3,  
scattered throughout  xylem region;  xylem parenchyma simple pitted, squarish wide  
lumen; xylem rays 1-5 seriate, consisting of radially elongated cells; rhomboidal crystal  
of calcium oxalate packed in xylem parenchyma and xylem rays; abundant simple,  
round starch grains measuring 6-17 µ in dia., found scattered throughout.
 3 Powder - Dull yellow; shows fragments of cork cells, small, pointed, aseptate, lignified  
fibres, simple, pitted vessels, lignified cells packed with rhomboidal crystals of calcium  
oxalate  and  numerous  simple,  round  to  oval  starch  grains  having  narrow  hilum,  
measuring 6-11 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Chloroform  :  
Methanol (85 : 15) shows under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.10 (light  
yellow), 0.38, 0.59 and 0.90 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at  
Rf. 0.10, 0.38, 0.59, 0.78, 0.87 and 0.98 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic -
Phosphomolybdic acid reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at 105 °C six 
spots appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.38, 0.59, 0.78, 0.87 and 0.98 (all grey). 
CONSTITUENTS - Sterols
PROPERTIES AND ACTION  - 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, V¡tahara, ávayathuhara. 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Da¿am£l¡riÀ¶a, Da¿am£la Kv¡tha C£r¸a,  
Induk¡nta Gh¤ta, Dhanvantara Gh¤ta,  
Gorocan¡di Va¶¢, N¡r¡yana Taila.
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áotha, P¡¸·u, Ar¿a, V¡tavik¡ra, Vibandha, Agnim¡ndya,  
Ëdhm¡na, Gulma, M£trak¤cchra, M£tr¡gh¡ta.
DOSE - 12-24 g. of the drug in powder form for decoction. 
 4 3. Ambasthaki (Rt)
AMBAâÙHAKÌ (Root)
AmbaÀ¶hak¢ consists of dried roots of Hibiscus sabdariffa Linn. (Fam. Mal- 
vaceae); an annual, erect, shrub, generally cultivated in the hotter parts of India. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:--
Assam.:--
Beng.:Masts Pal, Mesta
Eng.:Jamaican Sorrel
Guj.:Ambodi
Hindi.:Patsan, Patna
Kan.:Pudisoppu, Kempu Pundrike Pullichekir
Kash.:--
Mal.:Pariccakam, Pulicheera
Mar.:Lalambari
Ori.:Khataa, Kanria, Tak Bhend
Punj.:Kolada
Tam.:Pulichikire
Tel.:Pundikura, Gongura
Urdu.:Patsan
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Tap root greyish-brown in colour, stout, cylindrical with many lateral branches  
gradually tapering towards lower end, moderately rough due to minute longitudinal  
wrinkles,  1-2 cm thick; fracture, fibrous in bark region and short in wood region; no  
characteristic odour and taste. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature  root  shows  3-5  layers  of  cork  consisting  of  tangentially  elongated  
rectangular cells; secondary cortex almost absent, when present 2-3 layered, oval to  
polygonal,  thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; secondary phloem  composed  of  usual  
elements;  secondary  xylem  consists  of  vessels,  tracheids,  fibres  and  parenchyma  
traversed by xylem rays; vessels solitary or 2-4 in groups with pitted thickening; fibres  
and tracheids short to moderately long with pitted walls; medullary rays 1-3 cells wide  
and multicelled in height; starch grains both simple and compound and the later having  
2-3 components,  measuring  5.5-14  µ in dia. present in phloem  parenchyma, xylem  
parenchyma and ray cells. 
Powder  - Greyish-brown;  shows  pitted  vessels,  fragments  of  cork  cells, fibres  and  
tracheids, both simple and compound starch grains measuring 5.5-14 µ in dia. having 2-3  
components. 
 5 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than11Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid : Water (4: 1: 5) shows under U. V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.36,  
0.61, 0.92 (all blue) and 0.95 (pink). On exposure to Iodine vapour twelve spots appear  
at Rf. 0.06, 0.12, 0.17, 0.22, 0.29, 0.36, 0.44, 0.59, 0.61, 0.72, 0.82 and 0.92 (all yellow).  
On spraying with 5% Ethanolic Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for 
ten minutes seven spots appear at Rf. 0.29 (grey), 0.36 (violet), 0.44, 0.61, 0.73, 0.82  
and 0.92 (all grey). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sterols and Polysaccharides. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya:--
Vipaka :Amla 
Karma :Kaphahara,  Pittahara,  Rucikara,  Asthisa´dh¡naka,  Vra¸aropa¸a,  
D¢pana, Ka¸¶ha¿odhana. 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - PuÀy¡nuga C£r¸a
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Pakv¡tis¡ra, Kapharoga, Galaroga, V¡taroga,  
Asthibhagna, Vra¸a.
DOSE -  5 -10 g.
 6 4. Amra (Sd.) 
ËMRA (Seed)
Ëmra consists of dried seed of Mangifera indica Linn. (Fam. Anacardiaceae), a  
tree found wild or cultivated throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Ëmrab¢jamajj¡
Assam.:--
Beng.:Am
Eng.:Mango
Guj.:Aambaro, Ambanoo, Aambo, Keri
Hindi.:Aam
Kan.:Amavina
Kash.:--
Mal.:Manga
Mar.:Aamba
Ori.:Amkoili, Ambakoiti
Punj.:Amb
Tam.:Mangottai Paruppu, Maangottai
Tel.:Mamidi-Jeedi
Urdu.:Aam
DESCRIPTION - 
a)  Macroscopic: 
Seed 3-4.5  cm  long,  1.5-2.5  cm  wide, ovoid,  oblong  covered  with wrinkled  
integument,  both  outer  and  inner  integument  closely  united,  outer  integument  buff  
coloured, inner integument reddish-brown; taste, bitter and astringent.
b)  Microscopic:
Seed shows outer integument consisting of tangentially elongated, irregular, thin-
walled, parenchymatous  cells, with  poorly  developed  conducting  tissues  of  vessels  
showing spiral thickenings towards inner integument, inner integument consisting of  
slightly rectangular, wavy and large thin-walled parenchymatous cells; cotyledons 2,  
composed  of  isodiametric,  parenchymatous  cells  fully  packed  with  simple  and  
compound starch grains; compound starch grains consisting of 2-6 components, each  
starch grain round to oval, measuring 2-28  µ in dia., a few conducting tissues with  
spiral vessels also found scattered in parenchymatous cells of cotyledons. 
 7 Powder - Greyish-buff; shows reddish-orange coloured cells of integument, thin-walled,  
parenchymatous  cells,  simple  and  compound  starch  grains,  consisting  of  2-6  
components, measuring 2-28 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. - 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4:1:5)  shows  under  U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.62  
(yellowish) and 0.92 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.07,  
0.29, 0.62, 0.77 and 0.93 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid  
reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at 110 °C five spots appear at Rf. 0.07  
(grey), 0.29 (grey), 0.62 (grey), 0.77 (brown) and 0.93 (brown). 
CONSTITUENTS - Tannins - Pyrogallotannins. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION  -
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :V¡takara, Sa´gr¡h¢, K¤mighna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  PuÀy¡nuga C£r¸a, B¤hat Gang¡dhara C£r¸a,  
A¿ok¡riÀ¶a
THERAPEUTIC USES - At¢s¡ra, Prav¡hik¡,Chrdi, D¡ha, Tvagroga.
DOSE - 1-2 g. of the drug in powder form. 
 8 5. Amra (St.Bk.)
ËMRA (Stem Bark)
Ëmra consists of dried stem bark of Mangifera indica Linn. (Fam. Anacardia- 
ceae), a tree found wild or cultivated throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Ëmra
Assam.:Aam
Beng.:Ama, Am
Eng.:Mango
Guj.:Ambo
Hindi.:Ama
Kan.:Mavu
Kash.:--
Mal.:Mavu
Mar.:Amba
Ori.:Am, Amba
Punj.:Amb
Tam.:Mamaram
Tel.:Amaramu
Urdu.:Aam
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug  occurs  in  pieces  of  variable  size  and  thickness,  surface  rough  due  to  
longitudinal  cracks,  fissures  and  scattered,  raised  lenticels,  greyish  to  dark  brown  
externally and yellowish-white to reddish internally; odour, pleasant; taste, astringent.
b)  Microscopic:
Mature bark, shows a wide cork consisting of tangentially elongated cells, a few  
outer  layers  brown  and  inner  lighter  in  colour,  at  a  few  places  lenticels  appear;  
secondary cortex almost absent; secondary phloem wide, consisting of sieve elements,  
parenchyma and phloem fibres, traversed by medullary rays, resin canals and yellow  
coloured elongated, tannin sacs abundantly scattered throughout phloem region; stone  
cells thick walled, lignified, rectangular with wide lumen also present in single or in  
groups; starch grains and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate present in number of  
phloem cells; phloem fibres in groups composed of 2-15 or more cells, long and thick  
walled, phloem rays 1-3 seriate, 3 seriate rays more common, somewhat wavy, thin-
walled, radially elongated and filled with crystals of calcium oxalate and simple, round  
starch grains, measuring 12-16 µ in diameter. 
 9 Powder - Brown; shows fragments of cork cells, stone cells, single or in groups; phloem  
fibres, prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; simple, spherical to elliptical, starch grains  
measuring 12 - 16 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than9Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 20Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 14Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4 : 1 : 5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) three violet spots at Rf. 0.12, 0.73 and  
0.87. On exposure to Iodine vapour four yellow coloured spots appear at Rf. 0.33, 0.51,  
0.74 and 0.88. On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and after heating  
the plate at 105°C for ten minutes, three grey coloured spots appear at Rf. 0.49, 0.69 and  
0.88. 
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannins - Protocatechuic Acid, Catechin, Mangiferin, Alanine,  
Glycine, α -Aminobutyric acid, Kinic and Shikimic Acids. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Gr¡h¢, Vra¸aropa¸a, Kaphapitta¿¡maka, Rucya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Nyagrodh¡di C£r¸a, Nyagrodh¡di Kv¡tha Cur¸a,  
Candan¡sava, Graha¸¢mihira Taila, M£tra  
Sangrha¸¢ya KaÀ¡ya C£r¸a.
THERAPEUTIC USES - Atis¡ra,  Vra¸a, Agnim¡ndya, Grahan¢, Prameha, Yoni Roga
DOSE - 3-6 g. of powder.
              25-50 g. for decoction.
 10 6. Amrata (St)
ËMRËTA (Stem)
Ëmr¡ta  consists  of  dried  stem  of  Spondias  pinnata  (Linn.  f.)  Kurz  Syn.  S.  
mangifera  Willd.,  S.  acuminata  Roxb.  non  Gamble  (Fam.  Anacardiaceae);  a small,  
aromatic, deciduous tree, upto 27 m high and 2-5 m in girth, found wild or cultivated  
almost throughout the country, ascending upto an altitude of 1500 m in the Himalayas,  
and also distributed in Andamans. 
SYNONYMS - 
Sansk.:Ëmr¡taka, Marka¶amrah, Kap¢tana, 
Assam.:Amda
Beng.:Amda
Eng.:Indian Hog. Plum, Hog Plum
Guj.:Jangali Ambo, Ambeda
Hindi.:Ambada
Kan.:Ambate, Amatemara
Kash.:--
Mal.:Ambazham
Mar.:Ambada
Ori.:Aabada
Punj.:--
Tam.:Mampulecci, Mampulicci
Tel.:Ambalamu
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Stem  occurs  in  cut  pieces,  about  3.5  -  10.0  cm  long,  1.0-3.0  cm  in  dia.,  
cylindrical, more or less rough due to longitudinal wrinkles; occasionally a few round,  
prominent leaf scars also present, reddish-grey externally having lenticel, white or cream  
coloured internally with prominent dark brown centre, light in weight; fracture very  
hard; odour and taste not characteristic. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature stem shows a wide zone of cork ranging from 15-25 rows, comprising of  
tangentially  elongated,  radially  arranged,  thin-walled cells  containing  reddish-brown  
contents, a few outer cells exfoliating; secondary cortex consisting of 15-17 layers, oval  
to polygonal, tangentially elongated, thin-walled cells, followed by 2-3 tangential bands  
comprising of groups of stone cells; secondary phloem consisting of usual elements;  
phloem fibres arranged in tangential bands, thick-walled, lignified; prominent lysigenous  
cavities surrounded by a number of tannin sacs present in between the patches of phloem  
fibres;  phloem  parenchyma  consisting  of  thin-walled  cells  having  a  few  prismatic  
 11 crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  secondary  xylem  consists  of  usual  elements,  lignified;  
vessels single or in groups of 2-4 having simple pits, occasionally reticulate thickening,  
fibres fusiform with blunt tips; tracheids thick-walled; xylem rays 1-2 cells wide and  
3-11 cells high; starch grains simple, round to oval having concentric striations and  
hilum, measuring 3 -14 µ in dia., present in secondary cortex, phloem parenchyma, xylem  
parenchyma and xylem rays.
Powder - Grey; shows fragments of cork cells, phloem fibres, stone cells mostly in  
groups, occasionally single; a few prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, simple and  
reticulate vessels; starch grains simple, round to oval having concentric striations and  
hilum in centre, measuring 3-14 µ in diameter.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. - 
T.L.C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  ‘G’ plate  using  Chloroform  :  
Ethylacetate : Formic acid (5 : 4 : 1) shows in visible light three spots at Rf. 0.08, 0.74  
and 0.83 (all grey). Under UV (366 nm) five fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.04,  
0.79, 0.83, 0.87 (all blue) and 0.93 (sky blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots  
appear at Rf. 0.13, 0.48, 0.74, 0.83,0.87 and 0.93 (all yellow). On spraying with 10%  
Ferric chloride solution (aqueous) reagent two spots appear at Rf. 0.04 and 0.93 (both  
blue).
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannins
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
Rasa :KaÀ¡ya, Amla 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :V¡taghna, S¡raka 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - D¡dhika Gh¤ta
THERAPEUTIC USES - D¡ha, KÀaya, Rakta Vik¡ra, Atis¡ra
DOSE - 1-3 g. of powder.
 12 7. Apamarga (Rt.) 
APËMËRGA (Root)
Ap¡m¡rga  consists  of  dried  root  of  Achyranthes  aspera  Linn.  (Fam. 
Amaranthaceae);  a  stiff  erect,  0.1-0.9  m  high,  herb  found  commonly  as  a  weed  
throughout the country up to 900 m.
SYNONYMS -
Sansk:Adhah¿alya, áikhari, May£raka
Assam:Chirchita
Beng:Apang
Eng:Prickly Chaff Flower
Guj:Aghedo
Hindi:Chirchira, Latjira
Kan:Uttarane, Uttaren
Kash:--
Mal:Kadaledee
Mar:Anghada
Ori:--
Punj:Puthakanda, Lattajeera
Tam:Nayuruvi
Tel:Uttareni
Urdu:Chirchita
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Tap root cylindrical slightly ribbed, upto 1.0 cm in thickness, gradually tapering,  
rough  due  to  presence  of  some  root  scars;  secondary  and  tertiary  roots  present;  
yellowish-brown; odour, not distinct; taste not characteristic. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature root shows 6-10 layered, rectangular, tangentially elongated, thin-walled  
cork cells; secondary cortex consisting of 6-9 layers, oval to rectangular, thin-walled  
parenchymatous  cells  having  scattered,  thick-walled,  irregular  lignified  stone  cells,  
followed by 5-6 discontinuous rings of anomalous secondary thickening, composed of  
vascular tissues; small patches of sieve tubes are distinct in the phloem parenchyma  
demarcating  the  xylem  rings;  secondary  xylem  composed  of  tracheids,  fibres  and  
parenchyma;  vessels  with  both  simple  and  bordered  pits  and  with  scalariform  
thickening, measuring 135-348 µ in length and 32-64 µ in width; fibres pointed at both  
ends with walls moderately thickened, measuring 260-740 µ in length and 12-24 µ in 
width; tracheids have tapering ends, measuring 165-535  µ in length and 17-34  µ in 
width.
 13 In A. bidentata BL. vessels show bordered pits and reticulate thickening; medullary  
rays not distinct; stone cells and prismatic crystals absent in cortex.
Powder - Yellowish-brown; shows  fragments of rectangular  cork cells, stone cells,  
vessels showing bordered pits and scalariform thickening, fibres and a few prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than9Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol  
(95:5) shows under UV (366 nm) five fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.05, 0.19, 0.43, 0.50 and  
0.97 (all light blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.12,  
0.43, 0.50, 0.92 and 0.97 (all yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent followed by  
5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent two spots appear at Rf 0.12 and 0.97 (both light  
orange).
CONSTITUENTS  - Saponins 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, Sara, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana,  V¡tahara,  P¡cana,  Rucya,  Kaphan¡¿aka,  Medohara,  
M£trala, Vantihara. 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - Agastya Har¢tak¢ Ras¡yana, Mah¡ Pancagavya  
Gh¤ta, Vasty¡may¡ntaka Gh¤ta, Mah¡ ViÀagarbha  
Taila,  Panaviral¡di KÀ¡ra, Ap¡marga KÀ¡ra  
Taila, Ks¡ra Taila
THERAPEUTIC USES - Chardi, Ëdhmana, Ka¸·u, áula, Apac¢, Granthi, Bhagandara,  
H¤da Roga, Jvara, ávitra,V¡dhirya, Udara Roga, Yak¤t Roga,  
Danta Roga,  Rakta Vik¡ra.
DOSE - 5-10 g
 14 8. Aralu (St.Bk)
ARALU (Stem Bark) 
Aralu  consists  of  dried  stem  bark  of  Ailanthus  excelsa  Roxb.  (Fam. 
Simarubaceae); a large deciduous  tree occurring in Bihar, Chhota  Nagpur,  Madhya  
Pradesh, forests of Ganjam, Vishakhapatnam and Deccan.
SYNONYMS - 
Sansk:Ka¶va´ga, D¢rghav¤nta
Assam:Aralu
Beng:--
Eng:--
Guj:Aralavo
Hindi:Arlu, Maruk, Ghoda Karanj
Kan:Hiremara Hebbever
Kash:Merumaram, Mattipongilyam
Mal:Merumaram, Mattipongilyam
Mar:Ghoda Karanj
Ori:Dakshinakabala, Mahala
Punj:Aruo
Tam:Peruvagai
Tel:Peddmanu
Urdu:--
DESCRIPTION - 
a)  Macroscopic: 
Bark thick, external surface light grey, granular and rough due to presence of  
longitudinal  ridges,  internal  surface  yellowish-white  and  fibrous;  fracture,  fibrous;  
odour, disagreeable when fresh; taste, bitter.
b)  Microscopic:
Stem  Bark  cork  multilayered,  compactly  arranged,  tangentially  elongated,  
thinwalled cells obliterated at certain points due to rhytidoma; secondary cortex narrow,  
composed  of tangentially elongated cells, a few cells contain rosette and prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate; phloem, wide, consisting of sieve elements, parenchyma,  
fibres and stone cells; a few layers of outer phloem collapsed forming ceratenchyma;  
stone cells, in groups and in singles, present towards outer region of phloem; lignified  
fibres present in groups in radial rows in inner phloem region; calcium oxalate crystals  
similar to those found in secondary cortex also found in phloem region; medullary rays  
not distinct.
 15 Powder - Brownish-yellow, fragments of cork cells; groups or single, oval to polygonal,  
thick-walled, lignified, stone cells, having wide lumen with distinct striations, lignified  
phloem fibres, a few rosette and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than8.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 5.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol  
(95 : 5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) twelve fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.07 (sky blue), 0.10  
(sky blue) 0.21, 0.38, 0.47 (all yellow), 0.57 (sky blue), 0.71 (light sky blue), 0.76, 0.81  
(both yellow), 0.84 (sky blue), 0.93 (whitish blue) and 0.97 (sky blue). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour twelve spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.10, 0.21, 0.38, 0.47, 0.57, 0.71, 0.76,  
0.81, 0.84, 0.93 and 0.97 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid  
reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for fifteen minutes thirteen spots appear at Rf.  
0.07, 0.01(both grey), 0.21 (light brown), 0.24 (blue), 0.38, 0.47 (both light brown), 0.52  
(pink), 0.59 (blue), 0.71, 0.76 (both light brown), 0.84 (blue), 0.93 and 0.97 (both dark  
grey).
CONSTITUENTS  - β-Sitosterol, Quassinoids, Ailantic Acid, 
2-6 Dimethoxy-Benzoquinone and Melanthin.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Gr¡h¢, P¡cana, Kaphapitta, á¡maka, Vra¸a¿odhana 
 IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - PuÀy¡nuga C£r¸a, B¤hat Gang¡dhara C£r¸a,  
Aralu Pu¶ap¡ka
THERAPEUTIC USES - Atis¡ra, K¤mi, Ar¿a, Sannip¡ta Jvara, Bhrama, Tvakaroga,  
Chardi, KuÀ¶ha, Prav¡hik¡, Grahan¢, Prmeha, ávasa, Gulma,  
M£Àaka ViÀaja Roga
DOSE - 1-3 g.
 16 9. Arka (St.Bk)
ARKA (Stem Bark)
Arka  consists  of  dried  stem  bark  of  Calotropis  procera  (Ait.)  R.  Br.  (Fam.  
Asclepiadaceae); an erect shrub exuding milky white latex from cut parts, found wild  
more or less throughout India.
SYNONYMS - 
Sansk.:S£rya
Assam.:Akand, Akan
Beng.:Akanda, Akone
Eng.:Maddar
Guj.:Aakado
Hindi.:Aak, Madar, Akavana
Kan.:Ekka, Ekkagida
Kash.:--
Mal.:Errikku
Mar.:Rui
Ori.:Arakku
Punj.:Akk
Tam.:Vellerukku, Erukku
Tel.:Jilledu
Urdu.:Madar, Aak
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug occurs in channelled, quilled and fibrous pieces, upto 0.1 - 0.5 cm thick,  
external surface yellowish brown having longitudinal cracks, internal surface greenish,  
smooth, with an occasional wood tissue attached; fracture, fibrous; odour and taste not  
distinct.
b)  Microscopic:
Stem  bark  shows  exfoliated  cork,  consisting  of  6-8  layers  of  tangentially  
elongated,  thick-walled  cells;  where  cork  has  not  developed,  epidermis  present  
consisting of a single layered rectangular cells covered externally with striated cuticle;  
secondary cortex composed of tangentially elongated, oval, rounded or rectangular thin-
walled, parenchymatous cells having intercellular spaces, some cells contain rosette  
crystals of calcium oxalate, a number of rounded, oval to elongated, single or groups of  
stone cells and latex cells also found scattered in this region; pericyclic fibres numerous,  
lignified; secondary phloem composed of sieve elements, phloem parenchyma, phloem  
fibres and phloem rays; phloem parenchyma rectangular to polygonal in shape having  
rosette crystals of calcium oxalate, latex cells and stone cells similar to those found in  
secondary  cortex;  phloem  fibres  aseptate  with  bordered  pits;  phloem  rays  mostly  
uniseriate and run straight.
 17 Powder - Light yellowish-green; shows fibres, stone cells, rosette crystals of calcium  
oxalate and latex cells.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than12Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 15Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Chloroform  :  
Methanol (1: 1) shows under UV (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.63, 0.71, 0.81  
and 0.87 (all blue). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent followed by 5% Methanolic  
Sulphuric acid reagent one spot appears at Rf. 0.08 (orange).
CONSTITUENTS  - α - and β- Calotropeols, β-Amyrin, Giganteol, a Colourless wax,  
small amount of Tetracyclic Terpenes and Traces of Sterols.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, Sara, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, V¡tahara, áodhana, Virecan, Lekhan, Ropa¸a. 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Abhay¡ Lava¸a, Arka Lava¸a
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Udararoga, KuÀ¶ha, Ka¸·u, Vra¸a, Pl¢h¡roga, Gulma, Ar¿a,  
K¤miroga.
DOSE - 0.5-1 g. in powder form.
 18 10. Asana (St.Bk)
ASANA (Stem Bark)
Asana  consists  of  dried  stem  bark  of  Pterocarpus  marsupium  Roxb.  (Fam. 
Fabaceae); a moderate to large sized, deciduous tree, upto 30 m high and 2.5 m in girth,  
with straight clear bole, found throughout deciduous forests in peninsular India.
SYNONYMS -
Sansk:B¢jaka, P¢tasara, Asanaka, B¢jas¡ra
Assam:Aajar
Beng:Piyasala, Pitasala
Eng:Indian Kino Tree
Guj:Biyo
Hindi:Vijayasara, Bija
Kan:Bijasara, Asana
Kash:Lal Chandeur
Mal:Venga
Mar:Bibala
Ori:Piashala
Punj:Chandan Lal. Channanlal
Tam:Vengai
Tel:Yegi, Vegisa
Urdu:Bijasar
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug  consists  of  pieces  of  stem  bark,  1-1.5  cm  thick,  channeled,  usually  
yellowish-grey with brownish spots due to exudates, outer surface rough and uneven due  
to  protuberances  and  exfoliations,  longitudinal  and  horizontal  cracks  present,  inner  
surface fairly smooth; fracture fibrous, breaks with much difficulty; taste, astringent. 
b)  Microscopic:
Stem bark shows the presence of rhytidoma; idioblasts consisung of lysigenous  
cavities, present in a row just below cork; secondary cortex not distinct; secondary  
phloem occupies almost two third of the thickness of bark consisting of sieve elements,  
phloem parenchyma, phloem fibres, crystal fibres and traversed by a number of phloem  
rays; sieve elements and parenchyma found collapsed towards the middle and outer  
regions of phloem, forming ceratenchyma; phloem parenchyma thin-walled, circular to  
oval; phloem fibres single usually numerous in groups forming alternating bands throu-
ghout phloem region, thick-walled and lignified with a small lumen; rhomboidal crystals  
of  calcium  oxalate  found  scattered  throughout  the  region;  lysigenous  cavities  and  
tanniniferous ducts filled with red colour masses distributed throughout phloem region;  
 19 phloem  rays  very  close  to  each  other,  mostly  uniseriate  but  biseriate  rays  also  
occasionally found .
Powder - Yellowish-brown; shows plenty of lignified fibres, crystal fibres, reddish -  
brown contents and free rhomboidal crystals of calcium oxalate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than18Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 7.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 11.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
Acid: Water (4:1:5) shows six spots at Rf 0.09, 0.22, 0.41 0.52, 0.63 and 0.78 (all  
brown). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf 0.09, 0.22, 0.41, 0.63,0.78  
(all brown) and 0.92 (yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic Phosphomolybdic acid  
reagent six spots appear on heating the plate at 105 °C for about ten minutes at Rf. 0.09,  
0.22 (both blue), 0.41 (faint blue), 0.63, 0.78 and 0.92 (all blue).
CONSTITUENTS   -  Tannins and Gum Kino (which contains Kino-Tannic Acid, 1 -
Epicatechin and a reddish brown colouring matter).
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Pittahara, S¡raka, V¡t¡rtidoÀanut, GaladoÀaghna, Ke¿ya, Tvacya,  
Raktama¸·aln¡¿in¢, SleÀmahara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - N¡rasi´gha Gh¤ta Ras¡yana
THERAPEUTIC USES - P¡¸·u, Prameha, MedodoÀa, KuÀ¶ha, K¤miroga, ávitra,  
Madhumeha, Sthoulya.
DOSE - 32-50 g. of the drug for decoction. 
 20 11. Asthisamharaka (St.)
ASTHISAMHÎTA (Stem)
Asthisamh¤ta  consists  of  dried  stem  of  Cissus  quadrangularis  Linn.  (Fam. 
Vitaceae); a perennial fleshy cactus-like climber with tendrils and a quadrangular stem,  
found throughout the hotter parts of India alongside hedges.
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Vajravall¢,Chatudh¡r¡
Assam.:Harjara
Beng.:Hadajora
Eng.:--
Guj.:Hadasankala
Hindi.:Hadjod
Kan.:Mangaraballi
Kash.:--
Mal.:Changalam Parande
Mar.:Kandvel
Ori.:Hadbhanga
Punj.:Haddjor
Tam.:Perandai
Tel.:Nalleru
Urdu.:Hathjod
DESCRIPTION - 
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug occurs as pieces of stem of varying lengths; stern quadrangular, 4 -winged, 
internodes constricted at nodes; a tendril occasionally present at nodes; internodes 4-15  
cm long and 1-2 cm thick; surface smooth, glabrous, buff coloured with greenish tinge,  
angular portion reddish-brown; no taste and odour. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature stern shows squarish outline with prominent projection at each anular  
point; epidermis single layered, covered externally with thick cuticle; epidermal cells  
thin-walled, rectangular and tangentially elongated, followed by 2-3 layers of cork and  
single layered cork cambium; cortex composed of 8-16 layers of thin-walled, circular to  
oval parenchymatous cells; four patches of collenchymatous cells present in all the four  
angular points embedded in cortical region like an umbrella arching over large vascular  
bundles; in the projected portion of angular region cortical cells filled with brown-red  
contents present; endodermis not distinct; stele consists of a large number of vascular  
bundles varying in size arranged in the form of a ring separated by rays of parenchyma;  
3 -4 vascular bundles larger in size, in each angular region, below collenchymatous  
 21 patch, while rest of bundles smaller in size; vascular bundles collateral and open type,  
capped  by  sc1erenchymatous  sheath  which  is  well  developed  in  larger  bundles;  
cambium and interfascicular cambium quite distinct; central region occupied by a wide  
pith  composed  of  thin-walled,  circular  to  oval  parenchymatous  cells;  idioblasts  
containing raphides and isolated acicular crystals of calcium oxalate present in the outer  
region of cortex and also in a number of cells throughout the region; rosette crystals of  
calcium oxalate also found in most of the cells in cortical region; starch grains present  
throughout the cortical and the pith regions.
Powder - Brown; shows fragments of vessels, fibres, parenchymatous cells and a few  
rosette crystals of calcium oxalate, starch grains and idioblast. containing raphides and  
isolated acicular crystals of calcium oxalate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than22Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 20Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9:1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.59 and 0.91 (both blue).  
On exposure to Iodine vapour four spots appear at Rf. 0.46, 0.56, 0.66 and 0.91 (all  
yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten  
minutes at 110°C five spots appear at Rf. 0.06, 0.46 (both violet), 0.59 (light violet),  
0.66 and 0.91 (both violet).
CONSTITUENTS  - Calcium Oxalate, Carotene and Ascorbic Acid
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :D¢pana, V¡t¡¿leÀmahara, Asthisandh¡nakara, CakÀuÀya, V¤Àya 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - LakÀ¡di Guggulu
THERAPEUTIC USES - K¤mi, Ar¿a, Asthibhagna, Sandhi Cyuta
DOSE - 10-20 ml. (Svarasa)
              3-6 g. (Powder)
 22 12. Atmagupta (Sd)
ËTMAGUPTË (Seed)
Ëtmagupt¡  consists  of  dried  mature  seed  of  Mucuna  prurita  Hook.,  Syn.  M 
pruriens  Baker. (Fam. Fabaceae); a slender extensive climbing plant found almost all  
over the country.
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Kapikacchu, Marka¶¢, Ka¸·ura
Assam.:Banar Kakua
Beng.:--
Eng.:Cowhage
Guj.:Kavach, Kaucha
Hindi.:Kewanch, Kaunch
Kan.:Nasugunne, Nasugunnee
Kash.:--
Mal.:Naikuruna
Mar.:Khajkuhilee, Kavach
Ori.:Baikhujnee
Punj.:Tatgajuli, Kawach
Tam.:Poonaikkali
Tel.:Doolagondi, Duradagondi
Urdu.:Kanwach, Konch
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Seed ovoid, slightly laterally compressed, with a persistent oblong, funicular  
hilum, dark brown with spots; usually 1.2-1.8 cm long, 0.8-1.2 cm wide, hard, smooth  
to touch, not easily breakable; odour, not distinct; taste, sweetish-bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature seed shows a thin seed-coat and two hard cotyledons; outer testa consists  
of single layered palisade-like cells; inner testa composed of 2 or 3 layers, outer layer of  
tangentially elongated, ovoid, thin-walled cells, inner 1 or 2 layers of dumb-bell or  
beaker-shaped, thick-walled cells; tegmen composed of a wide zone of oval to elliptical,  
somewhat compressed, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; some cells contain starch  
grains; cotyledons composed of polygonal, angular, thin-walled, compactly arranged,  
parenchymatous cells, containing aleurone and starch grains; starch grains small, simple,  
rounded to oval measuring 6-41  µ in dia., but not over 45  µ in dia.; a few vascular  
bundles with vessels showing reticulate thickening or pitted present,
 23 Powder - Pale cream coloured; shows fragments of testa with palisade-like cells thin -
walled parenchyma, reticulate and pitted  vessels, aleurone  and starch  grains  small,  
simple, rounded to oval measuring 6-41 µ in dia., but not over 45 µ. in dia.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 23Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
Fixed oil Not less than3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.8
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate, using n-Butanol : Acetic acid:  
Water (4:1:5), shows in visible light four spots at Rf. 0.51, 0.59, 0.69 (all grey) and 0.92  
(light yellow). Under UV (366 nm) six fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.45 (blue),  
0.51, 0.59, 0.69 (all grey), 0.79 (light blue) and 0.92 (blue). On spraying with Ninhydrin  
reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C seven spots appear at Rf. 0.17,  
0.28, 0.34 (all pink) 0.51 (orange), 0.59 (pink), 0.69 (grey) and 0.92 (pink).
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil, Alkaloid and 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylalanine.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Kaphan¡¿aka, V¡ta¿amana, VrÀya, Pittan¡¿aka, RaktadoÀan¡¿aka,  
B¤hmana, Balya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS -  Brhat Masa Taila
THERAPEUTIC USES - V¡tavy¡dhi, Kampav¡ta, Klaivya, Raktapitta, DuÀ¶avra¸a,  
Daurbalya.
DOSE - 3-6 g.
 24 13. Bharangi (Rt)
BHËRA×GÌ (Root)
Bh¡ra´g¢ consists of dried roots of  Clerodendrum  serratum  (Linn.) Moon (Fam.  
Verbenaceae); a shrub distributed throughout the country.
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:A´g¡ravall¢, Br¡hma¸ayaÀ¶ik¡
Assam.:--
Beng.:Bamun Hatee, Baman hatee, Bhuijam
Eng.:--
Guj.:Bharangee
Hindi.:Bharangee
Kan.:Gantubarangee
Kash.:--
Mal.:Cheruteku
Mar.:Bharangee, Bharang
Ori.:Chinds
Punj.:Bhadangee
Tam.:Cheruteku
Tel.:Ganttubrarangee
Urdu.:Bharangi, Baharangi
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Mature root hard, woody, cylindrical, upto 5 cm thick, external surface light  
brown having elongated lenticels; bark, thin and easily separated from a broad wood  
which shows marked medullary rays and concentric growth rings in a transversely cut  
surface; fracture, short; taste, acrid.
b)  Microscopic:
Mature  root  shows  stratified  cork  composed  of  14-20  layers  of  thin-walled,  
tangentially elongated cells; each stratification consists of 3-5 layers of cells; secondary  
cortex wide, outer 2 or 3 layers radially arranged and tangentially elongated, inner cells  
polyhedral or circular to ellipsoidal with intercellular spaces; a few cells modified into  
stone cells with greatly thickened wall having concentric striations and radiating canals  
with narrow lumen; some cells contain acicular crystals of calcium oxalate and a few  
contain  brown  colouring  matter;  secondary  phloem  consists  of  sieve  elements  and  
parenchyma mostly collapsed  in outer  region,  forming ceratenchyma; some phloem  
parenchymatous cells modified into stone cells similar to those in secondary cortex but  
somewhat smaller  and  with  greater  thickening'  of  walls;  secondary  xylem  diffused  
porous consisting of vessels, tracheids, fibres and xylem parenchyma traversed by xylem  
rays; macerated preparation show wider vessels cylindrical, drum-shaped, some being  
elongated at one end having bordered pits, rarely reticulate or pitted, while narrower  
 25 ones elongated with spiral to reticulate thicken- tracheids long, cylindrical with tapering  
ends and bordered pits; xylem fibres moderately thick-walled with mostly tapering,  
pointed ends and oblique bordered pits; xylem parenchyma square to rectangular with  
simple pits on their walls; medullary rays 1-4 cells wide and 2-50 cells high, 2 or 3 cell  
wide  rays  more  common,  having  simple  pits  on  their  walls;  acicular  crystals  and  
abundant simple and compound starch grains measuring up to 20 µ in dia. present in a  
number of cells throughout the region.
Powder - Light-brown; shows vessels reticulate, spiral and with bordered pits, starch  
grains simple and compound, round to oval, measuring upto 20 µ in dia. and acicular  
crystals; stone cells as describes under microscopy present.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter Not more than 2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than 11Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 12Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4:1:5) shows in visible light two spots at Rf. 0.62 and 0.74 (both dirty  
yellow).  Under  UV  light  (366  nm)  three  fluorescent  zones  are  visible  at  Rf.  0.62  
(yellowish  green),  0.68  (blue)  and  0.74  (yellowish  green).  On  spraying  with  5%  
Methanolic Sulphuric acid and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C two spots 
appear at Rf. 0.62 and 0.74 (both grey).
CONSTITUENTS  - Saponins 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphahara, P¡cana, Rucya, V¡tahara, áw¡sahara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Ayask¤ti, Kanak¡sava, Da¿am£l¡riÀ¶a, R¡sn¡di  
Kv¡tha C£rna, Dhanvantara Gh¤ta, Mah¡  
V¡tagaj¡nku¿a Rasa.
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Gulma, Jvara, áv¡sa, K¡sa, YakÀm¡, P¢nasa, áotha, Hikk¡,  
RaktadoÀa.
DOSE - 3-6 g. of powder.
            10-20 g. of kwatha curna.
 26 14. Bijapura (Fr.Frt.)
BÌJAPÍRA (Fresh Fruit)
B¢jap£ra consists  of fresh fruit of  Citrus medica  Linn. (Fam. Rutaceae); an  
evergreen shrub or small tree, about 3.6 m high with short, thick and thorny branches,  
cultivated sparsely throughout the warm-moist regions of the eountry.
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:M¡tulu´ga
Assam.:Jaradeda
Beng.:Bijipura, Mutulanga
Eng.:Wild Lemon, Citron
Guj.:Bijora
Hindi.:Bijoura
Kan.:Madavala, Madalahannu, Madala
Kash.:--
Mal.:Matala Narakam, Gonapatinarakam, Bongi, Mathulanarakam,  
Mathulanga
Mar.:Mahalunga, Bijora
Ori.:Jambhira
Punj.:Galgal
Tam.:Turunji Pazham, Kadarangai
Tel.:Madi Phalam
Urdu.:Turanj
DESCRIPTION - 
Macroscopic: 
Fruit-hesperidium, 5-10 cm long, ovoid, oblong or globose, nipple-shaped at the  
end with thick, rough or irregular or warted rind; dark green when unripe and yellow  
when ripe; pulp, pale yellow; taste, acidic and sweetish. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Nil Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 20Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water -soluble extractive Not less than40Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
 27 T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene : Ethylacetate (9 :  
1) shows under U.V. (3661 nm) seven fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.03 (light sky blue), 0.08  
(yellowish green), 0.11(light sky blue), 0.19(light sky blue), 0.39 (light sky blue), 0.56  
(dark sky blue) and 0.66 (light sky blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour ten spots appear  
at Rf. 0.03, 0.04, 0.08, 0.11, 0.16, 0.38, 0.43, 0.53, 0.72 and 0.93 (all yellow). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Volatile oil
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Amla 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Amla 
Karma :Ka¸ha  áodhaka,  Chardigraha¸a.,  D¢pana,  H¤dya,  Jihv¡¿odhaka,  
Kaphahara, Medhya, Pittahara, V¡tahara, Var¸an¡¿aka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - KÀ¡ra Taila, Hi´guv¡di C£r¸a, Ka´k¡yana  
Gutik¡, Taru¸¡rka Rasa, áa´kha Dr¡vaka,  
M¡diphala Ras¡yana 
THERAPEUTIC USES    -  Raktapitta, Sv¡sa, K¡sa, Aruci, T¤À¸¡, Udara Roga,  
Vibandha, Mad¡tyaya, Hikk¡, Agnim¡ndya
DOSE - 10-20 ml. of juice.
 28 15. Bilva (Rt.)
BILVA (Root) 
Bilva consists of dried root of Aegle marmelos Corr. (Fam. Rutaceae); an armed,  
medium sized tree, occurring in the plains and upto 1000 m in the hills, as well as  
cultivated throughout the country, particularly in sacred groves. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:ár¢phal
Assam.:Bael, Vael
Beng.:Bela, Bilva 
Eng.:Bael Root, Bengal Quince
Guj.:Bilivaphal, Bill, Bilum
Hindi.:Bel, Bela, Sriphal 
Kan.:Bilva
Kash.:--
Mal.:Koovalam
Mar.:Baela, Bel
Ori.:Bela
Punj.:Bil
Tam.:Vilvam
Tel.:Maredu
Urdu.:Bel
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root  cream  yellow  or  pale  yellowish-brown,  thin,  irregularly  and  shallowly  
ridged  due  to  formation  of  longitudinal  and  transverse  lenticels,  surface  ruptured,  
peeling off in layers, internal surface cream to light yellow; fracture, short; taste, sweet.
b)  Microscopic:
Root shows lignified and stratified cork consisting of 3 or 4 alternating bands of  
4-14 layers of smaller cells and a few layers of larger cells having golden  yellow  
contents; secondary cortex, a wide zone, consisting of large, polyhedral, parenchymatous  
cells  and  stone  cells  of  varying  shapes  and  sizes,  thick-walled,  lignified,  scattered  
throughout region; secondary phloem consists of sieve elements, fibres, parenchyma and  
crystals fibres traversed by phloem  rays; some sieve elements compressed, forming  
tangential bands of ceratenchyma alternating with bands of lignified phloem fibres in  
outer phloem region, but intact in inner phloem region; phloem parenchyma radially and  
transversely elongated; phloem fibre groups arranged in concentric rings, fibre groups in  
inner phloem region extend tangentially from one meduallary ray to another, each group  
consisting  of  2-35  or  more  cells;  fibres  long,  generally  with  tapering  ends  but  
occasionally forked, lignified, some others have wavy walls; crystal fibres numerous,  
 29 long, about 9-30 chambered, each containing a prismatic crystal of calcium oxalate;  
medullary rays uni to triseriate in inner region while bi to pentaseriate in outer region of  
phloem;  cambium  consists  of  3-7  rows  of  tangentially  elongated  to  squarish  cells;  
secondary xylem consists of vessels tracheids, fibres and xylem parenchyma; vessels  
scattered throughout xylem region, in groups of 2-5, single vessels also found, varying in  
shape and size, mostly drum-shaped, with bordered pits some having a pointed, tail-like  
process at one end; fibres thick-walled with blunt or pointed tips; xylem parenchyma  
rectangular  in  shape;  medullary  rays  uni  to  triseriate,  bi  and  triseriate  rays  more  
common,  triseriate rays 12-40  cells  high,  uniseriate rays  4-10  cells  high;  prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate present; starch grains simple, 5-19  µ in dia., mostly round to  
oval with centric hilum; compound starch grains having 2-3 components present in inner  
few layers of cork cells, secondary cortex, phloem and xylem rays. 
Powder - Grey to greyish-brown; shows thick-walled, angular cells of cork, numerous  
prismatic crystal of calcium oxalate, crystal fibres, starch grains simple, 5-19  µ in dia., 
mostly  round  to  oval  with  centric  hilum;  compound  starch  grains  having  2-3  
components, fragments of xylem vessels with bordered pits and thick-walled xylem  
fibres. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1per cent, Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than6per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 7per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 7per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4:1:5) shows under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.54 (bright  
sky blue). 0.84 (light sky blue) and 0.93 (bright sky blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour  
seven spots appear at Rf. 0.15, 0.27, 0.54, 0.67, 0.78 and 0.93 (all yellow). On spraying  
with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten 
minutes eight spots appear at Rf. 0.15, 0.27, 0.32, 0.38 (all grey), 0.54 (yellow) 0.67,  
0.84 (light grey) and 0.93 (brown) .
CONSTITUENTS  - Auraptene, Coumarins, Glycosides
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :M£trala, TridoÀaghna 
 
 30 IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -   M¡nasa Mitra Va¶aka, Am¤t¡riÀ¶a, Danty¡dyariÀ¶a,  
Agastya Haritak¢ Ras¡yana, Da¿am£lariÀ¶a, Da¿am£la  
Kv¡tha C£r¸a, Bilv¡di Leha.
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  V¡tavy¡dhi, áotha, á£la, Agnim¡ndya, Chardi, M£trak
¤cchra,Ëmav¡ta
DOSE - 2-6 g. of the drug in powder form.
 31 16. Bimbi (W.P.)
BIMBÌ (Whole plant)
Bimb¢ consists of dried whole plant of Coccinia indica W. & A. = C. cordifolia 
Cogn. Syn.  Cephalandra indica  Naud. (Fam. Cucurbitaceae); a climbing or prostrate,  
much branched, perennial herb, growing wild throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk:Tu¸·ik¡, Tu¸·iker¢
Assam:Kawabhaturi
Beng:Bimbu, Telakucha
Eng:Ivy-Gourd
Guj:Kadavighilodi, Ghilodi
Hindi:Kundaruki-Bel 
Kan:Tonde-Balli
Kash:--
Mal:Kova, Nallakova
Mar:Tondale
Ori:Pitakundii, Kainchikakudi 
Punj:Kanduri
Tam:Kovai
Tel:Donda Tiga
Urdu:Kunduru
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root -Root  available  in  cut  pieces  with  a  few  lateral  roots,  surface  rough  due  to  
longitudinal striations and lenticels, cylindrical, 0.5 -2.5 cm in dia., greyish-brown. 
Stem -Slender, soft, 0.3-1.5 cm in dia., branched, longitudinally grooved, glabrous,  
nodes swollen, whitish dots over external surface, a few tendrils attached with nodes,  
greyish coloured externally and cream to light yellow internally, fracture, fibrous; no  
odour and taste. 
Leaf -Petiolate, petiole cylindrical, simple 2-3.2 cm long, 3.8-9 cm or rarely 10 cm long,  
palmately lobed, with 3 to 5 lobes or angles, lobes broad, obtuse or acute, more or less  
sinuate,  occasionally  constricted  at  the  base,  often  with  circular  patches  of  glands  
between  nerves;  lamina  bright  green  above,  paler  beneath,  surface  studded  and  
sometimes rough with papillae. 
Flower -Ebracteate,  pedicellate,  incomplete,  unisexual,  actinomorphic,  pentamerous.  
Male  Flower pedicel  2-3.8  cm  long,  subfiliform,  calyx  tube  glabrous,  broadly  
campanulate, 4.5 mm long linear; corolla 2.5 cm long, white, veined, pubescent inside,  
 32 glabrous  outside,  segments  4.5  -7.5  mm  long,  triangular,  acute,  staminal  column  
glabrous, capitulum of anthers subglobose;  Female Flower pedicel 1.3 - 2.5 cm long,  
calyx and corolla as in male flowers; staminodes 3, subulate, 3 mm long, ovary fusiform,  
glabrous, slightly ribbed, stigma 3, bifid. 
Fruit -A pepo, ovoid, glabrous, 3.5 - 4.5 cm long and 1.5-2 cm thick, greenish-brown to  
yellowish-brown with white linings; no odour and taste. 
Seed - Somewhat obovoid, 0.7 cm long and 0.2-0.3 cm wide rounded at apex, much  
compressed, yellowish-grey. 
b)  Microscopic:
Root - Shows 7 or more rows of thin-walled cork cells having lenticels at places;  
secondary  cortex  4-7  layered,  oval  to  elliptical, tangentially  elongated,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells having groups of oval to rectangular, elongated stone cells in  
lower region; secondary phloem composed of usual elements; phloem fibres absent;  
secondary xylem consists of usual elements; vessels mostly solitary with simple pits;  
tracheids simple pitted; fibres simple pitted with pointed tips and arranged around the  
vessels; medullary rays 6-10 or more cells wide; starch grains abundant, simple, round to  
oval,  measuring  3-11  µ in  dia.,  and  compound  having  2-4  components  present  in  
secondary cortex, phloem and xylem parenchyma and ray cells. 
Stem -Mature stem with ridges and furrows, shows a single layered epidermis composed  
of tabular cells externally covered with cuticle, or the epidermis interrupted at certain  
places due to formation of cork cells; collenchyma 2-4 layered consisting of isodiametric  
cells;  secondary  cortex  narrow,  consisting  of  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells;  
pericycle present in the form of discontinuous ring of pericyclic fibres; vascular bundles  
10  in number, bicollateral, widely separated by broad strips of ground tissue arranged in  
a single ring, inner part of which almost meeting at centre of stem; secondary phloem  
consists of sieve-tubes, companion cells and phloem parenchyma; inner phloem semi-
lunar  in  shape;  secondary  xylem  in the centre of  each bundle,  consists  of  vessels,  
tracheids,  fibres  and  xylem  parenchyma;  vessels  numerous  uniformly  scattered  
throughout xylem, lignified, pitted and with spiral thickening; tracheids pitted; pith  
small, composed of thin walled parenchymatous cells. 
Leaf - 
Petiole - Shows single layered epidermis, consisting of flattened, tangentially elongated  
cells, covered externally with, striated cuticle; cortex differentiated into 2-5 layered  
collenchyma  and  2-6  layered  circular,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells  with  
conspicuous intercellular spaces; vascular bundles bicollateral, arranged in a single ring,  
usually nine, seven larger and two smaller, traversed by wide parenchymatous cells of  
medullary rays; some bundles capped by one or two layered, thick-walled, lignified,  
polygonal pericyclic sclerenchyma; centre occupied by very wide pith composed of large  
isodiametric parenchymatous cells. 
 33  Midrib -Single layered epidermis, on either side, externally covered with striated  
cuticle, followed by 1-3 layers of well developed collenchyma on the dorsal side and 3-5  
layers on the ventral side; vascular bundles, bicollateral, three, ventral larger and two  
dorsal smaller; layers of collenchymatous cells gradually reduce to 2 or 3 towards dorsal  
side, 1 or 2 on ventral side and ultimately towards apex of leaf, collenchyma reduces to 1  
layer on ventral side and 2 layers on dorsal side; parenchyma 2-3 layered on both sides;  
vascular bundles single, semicircular; vessels arranged in radial rows. 
Lamina -Dorsiventral structure with single layered upper and lower epidermis, externally  
covered  with  striated  cuticles;  epidermal  cells  show  almost  straight  walls  and  
anomocytic stomata in surface view; below upper epidermis palisade single layered;  
spongy parenchyma represented by 3-6 layers of loosely arranged cells, a number of  
veins surrounded by parenchyma, present in mesophyll. 
Fruit -Epicarp  single  layered;  mesocarp  composed  of  a  wide  zone  of  thin-walled  
parenchymatous cells differentiated into two regions, outer 5-6 layers rectangular to  
polygonal, smaller in size, while inner region composed of oval to polygonal cells of  
larger size; a few fibro-vascular bundles present in this region. 
Seed -Testa show ridges and furrows at a few places, more prominent at lateral sides,  
and consisting of oval to polygonal, thin-walled parenchymatous cells, upper most layer  
forms radially elongated thin-walled colourless cells; tegmen consists of single layered  
radially  elongated,  thin  walled,  lignified  cells,  followed  by  a  layer  of  thin-walled,  
collapsed parenchymatous cells; a few starch grains 3-6 µ in dia. scattered in this region;  
embryo consists of hexagonal to polygonal, thin-walled cells having a few oil globules. 
Powder - Greyish-brown; shows groups of round to polygonal parenchymatous cells,  
reticulate, spiral and pitted vessels, aseptate fibres, palisade cells, stone cells, simple and  
compound, round to oval, starch grains, measuring 3-11  µ in diameter, fragments of  
epidermis with straight walled cells and anomocytic stomata.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2per cent, Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than21per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than2per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 14per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol  
: Ammonia (90:18:2) shows under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.23  
(blue), 0.47 (red)  and 0.61 (blue). On spraying  with Dragendorff reagent one spot  
appears at Rf. 0.38 (orange). 
 34 CONSTITUENTS  - Saponins and Fixed Oil in seeds. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Pittahara,  V¡takara,  Atirucya,  Lekhhana,  Stambhana,  
Vibandh¡dhm¡nakara, Chardikara. 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS -  Vasty¡may¡ntaka Gh¤ta
THERAPEUTIC USES - K¡sa, áv¡sa, Jvara, Raktavik¡ra, D¡ha. áopha, P¡¸·u.
DOSE - 3-6 g. of the drug in powder form.
              5-10 ml. (Svarasa). 
 35 17. Changeri (W.P.)
CË×GERÌ (Whole Plant)
C¡´ger¢  consists  of  dried  whole  plant  of  Oxalis  corniculata  Linn.  (Fam. 
Oxalidaceae); a small annual or perennial, more or less erect herb with creeping or  
subterranean stem, 6-25 cm high, found throughout warmer parts of the country and also  
in all tropical and temperate climate, growing upto an elevation of 3000 m in North-  
West Himalayas. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:C¡´ger¢, Amlapatrik¡
Assam.:Chengeritenga
Beng.:Amrul
Eng.:Indian Sorrel
Guj.:Ambolee, Changeri, Teen Panaki, Rukhadi
Hindi.:Tinpatiya, Changeri, Ambilosa
Kan.:Pullamouradi, Sivargee, Purachi Soppu
Mal.:Pulliparel
Mar.:Ambutee, Ambatee, Ambti, Bhui Sarpati
Ori.:--
Punj.:Khatkal, Khattibootee, Khatmittha
Tam.:Puliyarai
Tel.:Pulichinta
Urdu.:Changeri, Teen Patiya
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root - Dark brownish, thin, about 1-2 mm thick, branched, rough, soft; no odour and  
taste. 
Stem - Creeping, brownish-red, soft, very thin, easily breakable; no odour and taste. 
Leaf  -  Palmately  compound,  trifoliate;  petiole-green,  thin,  about  3-9  cm  long,  
cylindrical, pubescent; leaflet-green, 1-2 cm long, obcordate, glabrous, sessile or sub  
sessile, base cuneate; taste, somewhat sour. 
Flower -Yellow, axillary, sub-umbellate. 
Fruit - Capsules cylindrical, tomentose.
Seed -Tiny, dark brown, numerous, broadly ovoid transversely striate. 
 
 36 b)  Microscopic:
Root - Shows 3-4 layers of cork, composed of thin-walled rectangular cells, brownish in  
appearance;  cortex,  a  wide  zone,  consisting  of  rectangular  and  oval,  thin-walled  
parenchymatous cells filled with simple starch grains, yellowish pigment and tannin;  
inner cortical cells rectangular and polygonal, smaller in size than miter ones; cortex  
followed by thin strips of phloem consisting of sieve tubes, companion cells and phloem  
parenchyma, cambium not distinct;  xylem consists of vessels, tracheids, fibres and  
xylem parenchyma; vessels cylindrical, pitted some with tail-like projection at one end;  
tracheids pitted with pointed ends; a few starch grains simple, round to oval measuring  
3-11µ in dia., present scattered throughout the region.
 
Stem - Shows single layered epidermis, composed of rectangular to oval cells, some of  
which are elongated to become unicellular covering trichomes; cortex consists of 4-5  
layers of thin-walled, circular and polyhedral parenchymatous cells; endodermis single  
layered of thin-walled rectangular cells; pericycle composed of two or three layers of  
squarish  and  polygonal  sclerenchymatous  cells;  vascular  bundles  6-7  in  number,  
arranged in a ring, composed of a few elements of phloem towards outer side and xylem  
towards inner  side; xylem  composed  of  pitted vessels, tracheids, fibres and  xylem  
parenchyma; central region occupied by pith composed of thin-walled, parenchymatous  
cells, a few simple, round to oval starch grains measuring 3-11  µ in dia, scattered 
throughout the region.
Leaf - 
Petiole - Shows rounded or plano-convex outline consisting of single layered epidermis  
of rectangular or circular, thin-walled cells; cortex 3-4 layers of thin-walled, circular,  
oval  or  polygonal  parenchymatous  cells,  generally  filled  with  green  pigment;  
endodermis single layered followed by 2-3 layers of sclerenchymatous pericycle, less  
developed towards upper side of petiole; vascular bundles 5 in number, arranged in a  
ring, consisting of phloem towards outer side and xylem towards inner side; centre  
occupied by a small pith; a few simple, round to oval starch grains, measuring 3-11 µ in 
dia., scattered throughout. 
Lamina  - Shows single layered epidermis on upper and lower surfaces, composed of  
rectangular cells; covering trichomes unicellular; palisade single layered composed of  
thin-walled, columnar cells, filled with green pigment; below palisade 2-3 layers of  
thinwalled, spongy parenchyma consisting of circular to oval cells filled with green  
pigment; stomata paracytic. 
Powder-  Greenish-brown;  shows  fragments  of  trichomes,  parenchymatous,  
sclerenchymatous cells, fibres, epidermis showing irregular cell walls in surface view; a  
few simple, rounded to oval starch grains, measuring 3-11 µ in diameter. 
 37 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Percent Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than20Percent Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than10Percent Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 5Percent Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 13Percent Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. - 
T.L.C.of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene :Ethylacetate  
(8 :2) shows under UV (366 nm) one fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.65 (blue). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.27, 0.53 and 0.65 (all yellow). On spraying  
with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at  
110°C three spots appear at Rf. 0.27, 0.53 and 0.65 (all grey). 
CONSTITUENTS - Vitamin C, Carotene, Tartaric Acid, Citric Acid and Malic Acid. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Amla, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Amla 
Karma :D¢pana,  Gr¡h¢,  Kaphahara,  Rucikara,  V¡tahara,  Pittakara,  
Agnivardhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - C¡nger¢ Gh¤ta
THERAPEUTIC USES - Graha¸¢, Ar¿a, KuÀ¶ha, Atis¡ra
DOSE - 5-10 ml. (Svarasa). 
             It is also used externally. 
 38 18. Chirabilva (Frt.) 
CIRABILVA (Fruit)
Cirabilva  consists  of  dried  fruit  of  Holoptelea  integrifolia  Planch.  (Fam. 
Ulmaceae);  a  large,  spreading,  glabrous,  deciduous  tree,  15-18  m  high,  distributed  
throughout the greater part of India upto an altitude of 600 m and sometimes grown on  
the road side. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:P£tigandha
Assam.:--
Beng.:--
Eng.:--
Guj.:Kanjo, Chirbil, Chirmil
Hindi.:Chirabil, Chiramil, Papri
Kan.:Tapasimara, Chirabilwa
Mal.:Avil, Aval
Mar.:Baval, Vavala
Ori.:Duranja, Karanj, Putikaranj
Punj.:Papri, Chirbid
Tam.:Avil Pattai
Tel.:Nemalinara, Tapazi
Urdu.:Papri
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Fruit a one seeded samara; light brown, obliquely elliptic or orbicular, 1.5- 2.5  
cm  wide,  2.5-3.5  cm  long,  winged  and  stalked,  indehiscent,  pubescent,  wings  
reticulately veined. 
b)  Microscopic:
Fruit shows single layered epicarp having numerous, pointed, unicellular hairs;  
mesocarp composed of 3-5 layered, oval to polygonal, elongated parenchymatous cells;  
a  few  vascular  bundles  and  tannin  cells  found  scattered  in  this  region;  endocarp  
consisting of 2-3 layered, round to oval, sclerenchymatous cells with striations and  
narrow lumen; perisperm in seed composed of single layered, parenchymatous cells  
filled with reddish-brown content; endosperm and embryo composed of colourless cells  
containing oil globules.
Powder  -  Reddish-brown;  shows  fragments  of  thin  walled,  oval  to  polygonal  
parenchymatous cells of endosperm, taniniferous oil globules, unicellular hairs, thick-
walled, polygonal, sclerenchymatous cells, polygonal cells of testa in surface view.
 39 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Percent Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than9Percent Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Percent Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 10Percent Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 13Percent Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9 : 1) shows under UV (366 nm) a fluorescent zone at Rf 0.85 (blue). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf 0.11, 0.38, 0.44, 0.50 and 0.85 (all yellow). On  
spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten 
minutes five spots appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.38, 0.44, 0.50 and 0.85 (all violet)
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Pittahara, Stambhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Piy£Àavall¢ Rasa, Gandharvahast¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a
THERAPEUTIC USES - Chardi, Ar¿a, K¤mi, KuÀ¶ha, Prameha.
DOSE - 1-3 g.
 40 19. Danti (Rt.) 
DANTÌ  (Root)
Danti  consists  of  dried  root  of  Baliaspermum  mantanum  Muell.-Arg.  (Fam.  
Euphorbiaceae);  a  leafy  undershrub,  distributed  in  outer  range  of  Himalayas  from  
Kashmir to Assam and in moist deciduous forests elsewhere in India. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Dant¢
Assam.:Danti
Beng.:Danti
Eng.:Wild Croton
Guj.:Danti
Hindi.:Danti
Kan.:Kadu Haralu
Mal.:Neervalam, Dantti
Mar.:Danti
Ori.:Danti
Punj.:Danti
Tam.:Danti
Tel.:Konda Amudamu
Urdu.:Danti
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root pieces almost cylindrical, straight or ribbed with secondary and tertiary  
roots, 0.2-1 cm thick and upto 10 cm or more in length, tapering at one end, tough,  
externally brown; surface, rough due to longitudinal striations, transverse cracks and  
scars of rootlets; internally cream-coloured; transversely smoothened root shows thin,  
brown bark and yellowish-white central core; taste, bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Shows 5-18 layered cork, consisting of brown coloured, suberised or lignified  
brick-shaped cells, a few cells containing tannin and red colouring matter; secondary  
cortex consists of 2-7 layers of oval to elliptical, tangentially elongated cells, a few  
cortical  fibres  are  also  present  in  this  region;  secondary  phloem  consists  of  usual  
elements, traversed by uni to biseriate phloem rays; secondary xylem consists of usual  
elements; vessels and tracheids, bordered pits, a few having reticulate thickening; fibres  
slightly thick-walled, narrow lumen and blunt tips; xylem rays 1 or 2 cells wide; rosette  
crystals of calcium oxalate and starch grains, present only in secondary cortex and  
phloem; starch grains solitary and in groups, simple, round to oval measuring 6-17 µ  in 
dia. 
 41 Powder  - Brown; shows fragments of cork more or less rectangular, thick-walled in  
surface view; rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; numerous phloem fibres with narrow  
lumen and blunt tips, border pitted- and reticulate vessels, tracheid and tannin cells,  
round  to  oval  simple  starch  grains  measuring  6-17  µ in  diameter,  and  in  groups  
occasionally. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Percent Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than10Percent Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than3Percent Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 1.5Percent Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 3Percent Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9 :1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) a fluorescent zone at Rf 0.65 (blue). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour two spots appear at Rf 0.51 and 0.65 (both yellow). On spraying with 50%  
Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C  two 
spots appear at Rf 0.51 and 0.65 (both grey). 
CONSTITUENTS    -  ß- Sitosterol and Triterpenoids, Resinous Glycosides, Phorbol  
Esters.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u 
Guna :Laghu, Sara, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :áodhaka, D¢pana, Kaphahara, RaktadoÀahara, Vi·ahara, Rocaka,  
Vik¡¿i, Vrana 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  DantyadyariÀ¶a, Punarnav¡ Ma¸·ura, AbhayariÀ¶a,  
Ka´k¡yana Gu¶ika, Dant¢har¢tak¢, Kalya¸aka  
KÀ¡ra, Kai¿ora Guggulu
THERAPEUTIC USES -  TvakadoÀa, D¡ha, áotha, Udararoga, á£laroga, Krimi, Ar¿a,  
A¿mari, Ka¸·u, KuÀ¶a, Vra¸a, Pl¢h¡, V¤ddhi, Gulma, K¡mal¡
DOSE - 1-3 g. of the drug in powder form.
 42 20. Dhattura (Sd.)
DHATTÍRA (Seed)
Dhatt£ra consists of dried seeds of Datura metel Linn.; Syn. D. fastuosa L., D. 
alba Ramph; D. cornucopaea Hort. (Fam. Solanaceae); occurring wild throughout the  
country.
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Kanaka, Ummatta, Dhust£ra
Assam.:Dhatura
Beng.:Dhutura, Dhutra
Eng.:White Thorn Apple
Guj.:Dhaturo
Hindi.:Dhatura
Kan.:Umbe
Kash.:--
Mal.:Ummam
Mar.:Dhatra
Ori.:Dudura
Punj.:Dhatura
Tam.:Oomattai, Umattai
Tel.:Ummettha, Erriummetta
Urdu.:Dhatura
DESCRIPTION -
a) Macroscopic: 
Seed reniform, compressed, flattened, surface finely pitted; 0.6 cm long, 0.4 cm  
wide; light brown to yellowish-brown in colour; thicker towards the curved edge, which  
is rugose; large, pale strophiole near micropyle; odourless; taste, bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Shows  in outline  more or less elongated,  irregular or wavy structure having  
bulgings  at  either  side;  testa  single  layered  consists  of  thick-walled,  lignified,  
sclerenchymatous cells forming club-shaped structure, followed by 3-5 layered more or  
less  tangentially  elongated,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells;  endosperm  encloses  
more or less curved embryo composed of polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells,  
filled with aleurone grains and abundant oil globules. 
Powder -  Brown and oily; shows fragments of testa of groups of thick-walled, light  
brown sclerenchymatous cells; polygonal, thin-walled parenchymatous cells containing  
oil globules and aleurone grains. 
 43 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than6Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 7Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene Ethylacetate:  
Diethylamine (7:2: 1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf 0.18,  
0.33 (both light blue) and 0.93 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear  
at Rf 0.33, 0.47 and 0.93 (all yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent two spots  
appear at Rf 0.33 and 0.47 (both orange). 
CONSTITUENTS   - Alkaloids - Tropane Alkaloids - Hyoscyamine etc. and Fixed Oil
PROPERTIES AND ACTION –
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara,  Var¸ya,  Madak¡r¢,  ViÀahara,  K¤mihara,  Vra¸ahara,  
Ka¸·uhara, Bhr¡mahara, V¡maka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Kanak¡sava, S£ta, áekhara Rasa, Jvar¡´ku¿a Rasa,  
LakÀm¢ Vil¡sa Rasa (Naradiya), Kanakasundara  
Rasa, Dugdha Va¶¢, Piy£Àavall¢ Rasa
THERAPEUTIC USES - K¤mi, Yuk¡, LikÀ¡
DOSE - 30-60 mg.
 44 21. Draksha (Frt.)
DRËKâË  (Fruit)
Dr¡kÀ¡  consists of dried mature fruits of Vitis vinifera Linn. (Fam. Vitaceae); a  
deciduous climber, mostly cultivated in north western India in Punjab, Himachal Pradesh  
and Kashmir for their use as dessert fruit. However, the dried fruits, known in trade as  
'Raisins', are mostly imported into India, from the Middle East and Southern European  
countries. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:M¤dvik¡, Gostani
Assam.:Dakh, Munaqqa
Beng.:Maneka
Eng.:Dry Grapes, Raisins
Guj.:Drakh, Darakh
Hindi.:Munkka
Kan.:Draksha
Kash.:--
Mal.:Munthringya
Mar.:Draksha, Angur
Ori.:Drakya, Gostoni
Punj.:Munaca
Tam.:Drakshai, Kottai Drakshai
Tel.:Draksha Kottai, Drakshai
Urdu.:Munaqqa
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Fruit a berry, sticky and pulpy, dark brown to black; oblong or oval, sometimes  
spherical; 1.5 -2.5 cm long and 0.5-1.5 cm wide; outer skin irregularly wrinkled forming  
ridges and furrows; usually contain 1-4 seeds, 4-7 mm long, ovoid rounded to triangular  
or simply ovoid, brown to black; odour, sweetish and pleasant; taste, sweet. 
b)  Microscopic:
A single layered epidermis cells filled with reddish-brown contents; mesocarp  
pulpy, made up of thin-walled, irregular cells containing prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate, measuring 13.75 -41 µ  in dia.; some fibro-vascular bundles also present in this  
region;  seeds  composed  of  testa  and  endosperm;  testa  composed  of  thick-walled  
yellowish cells; endosperm composed of angular parenchymatous cells containing oil  
globules and cluster crystals of calcium oxalate, measuring 11-16 µ in diameter. 
 45 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 25Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 70Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
Loss on drying Not more than15Per cent, Appendix 2.2.9
T.L.C. -
T.L.C of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4:1: 5) shows under UV (366 nm) a fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.29 (blue). On  
exposure to Iodine vapur four spots appear at Rf. 0.08, 0.29, 0.69 and 0.85 (all yellow).  
On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for about  
ten minutes at 110 °C three spots appear at Rf. 0.08 (black), 0.29 (black) and 0.98 (violet)
CONSTITUENTS  - Malic, Tartaric & Oxalic Acids, Carbohydrates and Tannins.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, Sara, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :CakÀuÀya, V¤Àya, B¤Æha¸a, V¡tapittahara, Svarya 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Dr¡kÀ¡sava, Dr¡kÀ¡riÀ¶a, Dr¡kÀ¡valeha, Dr¡kÀ¡di  
Kv¡tha C£r¸a, Dr¡kÀ¡di C£r¸a, El¡di Gu¶ika
THERAPEUTIC USES - T¤À¸¡, Jvara, K¡sa, áv¡sa, D¡ha, áoÀa, K¡mal¡, Raktapitta,  
KÀata KÀ¢na, Vibandha, Ar¿a, Agnim¡ndya, Mad¡tyaya,  
P¡¸·u, Ud¡varta, AÀya áoÀa, V¡tarakta
DOSE - 5-10 g. of the drug.
 46 22. Durva (Rt.)
DÍRVË (Root)
D£rv¡ consists of dried fibrous roots of Cynodon dactylon (Linn.) Pers. (Fam. 
Poaceae); an elegant, hard, perennial, creeping grass growing throughout the country and  
ascending to 2440 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:áatav¢rya
Assam.:--
Beng.:Durva
Eng.:Creeping Cynodon, Conch Grass
Guj.:Khadodhro, Lilidhro, Dhro
Hindi.:Doob
Kan.:Garike Hullu
Kash.:--
Mal.:Koruka Pullu
Mar.:Doorva, Hariyalee, Harlee
Ori.:--
Punj.:Dubada
Tam.:Aruvam Pullu
Tel.:Garika, Pacchgaddi
Urdu.:Doob Ghas, Doob
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Roots fibrous, cylindrical, upto 4 mm thick, minute hair-like roots arise from the  
main roots; cream coloured. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature root shows epiblema or piliferous layer composed of single layered, thin-
walled, radially elongated to cubical cells; hypodermis composed of 1-2 layered, thin-
walled, tangentially elongated to irregular shaped cells; cortex differentiated into two  
zones, 1 or 2 layers of smaller, thin-walled, polygonal, lignified sclerenchymatous and  
4-6 layers of thin-walled, elongated parenchymatous cells being larger; endodermis  
quite distinct being single layered, thick-walled, tangentially elongated cells; pericycle  
1-2 layers composed of thin-walled sclerenchymatous cells; vascular bundles consisting  
of xylem and phloem, arranged in a ring on different radials; xylem exarch, having usual  
elements; centre occupied by wide pith, composed of oval to rounded thick-walled  
parenchymatous  cells  containing  numerous  simple, round  to  oval  or  angular  starch  
grains measuring 4-16 µ in dia., and compound starch grains having 2-4 components.
 47 Powder  - Cream coloured; fragments of xylem vessels with pitted walls, thick-walled  
lignified sclerenchymatous cells and numerous simple round to oval or angular starch  
grains measuring 4-16 µ in dia., and compound starch grains having 2-4 components. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4:1:5) shows under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf 0.70, 0.89  
(both blue) and 0.92 (pink). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf 0.22,  
0.30, 0.37, 0.80, 0.89 and 0.92 (all yellow) On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric  
acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes six spots appear at Rf 0.22,  
0.30, 0.37, 0.80, 0.89, 0.92 (all grey). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Phenolic Phytotoxins and Flavonoids. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Kaphapitta¿¡maka,  Raktapittan¡¿aka,  D¡haghna,  Atis¡raghna,  
áramahara, Trptikara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Bal¡¿vagandha L¡kÀ¡di Taila, MadhuyaÀ¶y¡di  
Taila, Marma Gu¶ik¡, M¡nasa Mitra Va¶aka,  
Candrakal¡ Rasa 
THERAPEUTIC USES - Raktapitta, T¤À¸¡roga, D¡haroga, Visarpa, Tvakaroga, Arocaka,  
Duhsvapna, Bh£taroga, Raktapitta, Chardi, M£rcch¡,  
Raktapradara, M£tra D¡ha 
DOSE - 5-10 ml. (Svarasa).
 48 23. Eranda ( Fr.Lf.) 
ERAÛÚA (Fresh Leaf)
Era¸·a consists of fresh leaf of Ricinus communis Linn. with entire petiole (Fam.  
Euphorbiaceae), a tall glabrous shrub or almost small tree, 2-4 m high; found throughout  
India, mostly growing wild on waste land and also cultivated for its oil seeds. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Gandharva-Hasta, Panch¡´gul, V¡t¡ri
Assam.:Erri
Beng.:Bherenda
Eng.:Castor Oil Plant
Guj.:Erando
Hindi.:Erand, Rendee, Andu
Kan.:Harlu
Kash.:--
Mal.:Ambanakka, Avanakku
Mar.:Erand, Erandee
Ori.:Bheranda
Punj.:Erand
Tam.:Amanakku
Tel.:Amudanu, Amudmuchetu
Urdu.:Erand
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Leaves green or reddish-green, broad, palmately lobed, with 5-11 lobes, 30-60  
cm. dia., nearly orbicular, lobes oblong linear, acute or acuminate, margin serrate, vary  
from 4-20 cm in length, 2.5 -7.5 cm in width; petiole 10-20 cm long, cylindrical or  
slightly flattened towards distal and peltately attached to the blade, solid when young,  
becomes hollow on maturity. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Snigdha, SukÀma, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Kaphavatasamaka,  Vrsya,  Krmighna,  Pittaprakopaka,  
Raktaprakopaka, Yakrtutejaka 
 
 49 IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Caturbhadra Rasa, Caturmukha Rasa, Cint¡ma¸i  
Ras
THERAPEUTIC USES - K¤mi, M£trak¤cchra, Gulma, V¡tavy¡dhi, Vasti á£la
DOSE  - 10-20 ml. (Svarasa). 2-5 g. (Powder). 
 50 24. Eranda (Sd.)
ERAÛÚA (Seed)
Era¸·a consists of dried seed of Ricinus communis Linn. (Fam. Euphorbiaceae);  
a tall glabrous shrub or almost small tree, 2-4 m high; found throughout India, mostly  
growing wild on waste land and also cultivated for its oil seeds. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Gandharva-Hasta, Panch¡´gul, V¡t¡ri
Assam.:Erri
Beng.:Bherenda
Eng.:Castor Oil Plant
Guj.:Erando
Hindi.:Erand, Rendee, Andeo
Kan.:Harlu
Kash.:--
Mal.:Abanakka, Avanakku
Mar.:Eramd, Eramdee
Ori.:Bheranda
Punj.:Erand
Tam.:Amanakku
Tel.:Amudamu, Amudmuchetu
Urdu.:Erand
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Seeds oblong, one face convex and the other slightly flattened, 1-1.5 cm long,  
0.6-0.9 cm wide, 0.4-0.8 cm thick, testa hard, glossy, smooth, grey or brown to reddish-
brown  or  black  and  may  be  variously  marbled  or  striped, raphe  extends  from  the  
caruncle to chalaza; odour, not distinct; taste, weakly acrid. 
b)  Microscopic:
Seed shows a hard testa, membraneous tegmen, a fleshy endosperm, and thin  
embryo with flat, broad cotyledons; testa consists of hard, single layered epidermis,  
radially  elongated,  compactly  arranged,  slightly  curved  tabular  cells,  having  
reddishbrown contents followed by 8-10 layered, tangentially elongated parenchymatous  
cells, most of them containing oil globules, fibro-vascular bundles found scattered in this  
zone; endosperm consisting of oval, irregular cells filled with oil globules, abundant  
aleurone grains, measuring 8.2 - 13.75 µ in dia.; cotyledons, thin, flat and leafy. 
Powder -  Dark  brown,  oily;  shows  fragments  of  numerous  elongated  thick-walled,  
polygonal  cells  of  testa,  reddish-brown  tabular  cells,  thin-walled  oval  to  round  
parenchymatous cells of endosperm oil globules, numerous aleurone grains measuring  
upto 13.75 µ in dia. and including crystalloids and globoids within. 
 51 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 36Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
Fixed oil Not less than37Per cent, Appendix 2.2.8
T.L.C. -
T.L.C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Chloroform:  
Ethylacetate (95 : 5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) a fluorescent spot at Rf. 0.95 (sky  
blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.39, 0.50, 0.64, 0.72,  
0.80, 0.89 and 0.95 (all yellowish brown). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric  
acid reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at 105 ° C seven spots appear at  
Rf. 0.39, 0.50, 0.64, 0.72, 0.80, 0.89 and 0.95 (all brown). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Snigdha, SukÀma, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :D¢pana,  Medohara,  Ëmap¡cana,  Vi·bhedana,  Anulomana,  
Sroto¿odhana, Vayasth¡pana 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - B¤hat Saindhav¡di Taila, Gandharvahast¡di Taila,  
SiÆhan¡da Gaggulu, Mi¿raka Sneha
THERAPEUTIC USES - Ëmavata, Vibandha, Yak¤t Roga, Pl¢hodara, Ar¿a, Ka¶i á£la, G
¤dhras¢.
DOSE - 1/2  - 3 g. (Powder).
 52 25. Gambhari (St.) 
GAMBHËRÌ (Stem)
Gambh¡r¢ consists of dried stem of Gmelina arborea Roxb. (Fam. Verbenaceae),  
an  unarmed,  moderate  sized,  deciduous  tree,  found  scattered  in  deciduous  forest  
throughout the greater part of India upto an altitude of 1500 m., and the Andamans
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:K¡¿mar¢
Assam.:Gomari
Beng.:Gamar, Gambar,
Eng.:Candahar Tree, Cashmere Tree
Guj.:Sawan, Shewan
Hindi.:Gambhari
Kan.:Seevani, Kasmiri-mara
Kash.:--
Mal.:Sevana, Kumizhu
Mar.:Sivan
Ori.:Gambhari
Punj.:Khambhari
Tam.:Perunkurmizh
Tel.:Gummaditeku
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Stem occurs as longitudinally and transversely cut pieces having varying length  
and thickness; hard, woody, smooth except for a few scars of branches; yellowish-grey  
externally and cream coloured internally. 
b)  Microscopic:
Thin stem shows 10-15 or more layers of lignified cork, consisting of tangentially  
elongated, rectangular cells; secondary cortex 5-10 layers, oval to elliptical, thin-walled  
cells with tangential groups of fibres; pericycle present in the form of continuous ring  
consisting of patches of fibres alternating with stone cells: secondary phloem composed  
of usual elements, phloem fibres absent; in thick stem secondary cortex almost absent;  
secondary phloem well developed, consisting of usual elements; groups of stone cells  
and fibres scattered throughout this region; secondary xylem consists of usual elements;  
vessels solitary or 2-4 in groups having spiral thickening and bordered pits; fibres mostly  
aseptate but some septate with wide lumen; parenchyma paratracheal, a few in number;  
medullary rays 3-22 cells high and 1-4 cells wide; starch grains, simple as well as  
compound having 2-4 components measuring 3-11 µ  in dia., present in secondary cortex,  
phloem and xylem parenchyma and ray cells. 
 53 Powder  -  Crearnish-grey;  shows  fragments  of  lignified  cork  cells,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells, aseptate and a few septate fibre with wide lumen; vessels with  
spiral thickening and bordered pits, stone cells, simple, round to oval starch grains,  
measuring 3-1 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T. L  C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Chloroform  :  
Methanol (95 : 5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf 0.39 and 048  
(both blue) On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf 0.39, 0.48 and 0.85  
(all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the  
plate for about ten minutes at 105 °C three spots appear at Rf 0.39, 0.48 and 0.85 (all  
violet) 
CONSTITUENTS  - - Lignans 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :áramahara,  Kaphahara,  Medhya,  P¡cana,  Pittahara,  V¡tahara,  
ViÀahara, Dipana, Bhedan¢, Virecanopaga 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Karpur¡di Kuzambu (Laghu), Candan¡sava,  
Dant¡dyariÀ¶a, U¿¢r¡sava
THERAPEUTIC USES - áopha, Jvara, D¡ha, T¤À¸¡, Raktadosa, ViÀavik¡ra, Ar¿a, á£la,  
Raktapitta, Bhrama, áoÀa, Ëma á£la
DOSE - 5-10 g. of the drug for decoction. 
 54 26. Gojihva (Aerial Part)
GOJIHVË (Aerial Part)
Gojihv¡ consists of dried leaf and stem portion of  Onosma bracteatum  Wall. 
(Fam. Boraginaceae); a perennial, hirsute or hispid herb, sparsely distributed in North  
Western Himalayas from Kashmir to Kumaon at altitudes of 3,500-4,500 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Darv¢patra, V¤Àajihv¡, Kharapar¸in¢
Assam.:--
Beng.:Gojika Sak, Gojialata, Dadisha
Eng.:--
Guj.:Bhonpathari, Galajibhi
Hindi.:Gaujaban, Gojiya
Kan.:Shankha Huli, Aakalanalige, Gojaba
Mal.:Kozhuppu
Mar.:Govjaban, Paatharee
Ori.:Kharsan, Kharaptra
Punj.:Kazban
Tam.:Kharaptra, Dharviptra, Kozha
Tel.:Yeddunaluka
Urdu.:Gaozaban
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Stem - Cut pieces available in 5-9 cm long and 3.2 to 4.7 cm in dia., flattened, erect,  
stout; rough due to white, hard, hispid hairs and cicatrices, and longitudinal wrinkles;  
colour greenish-yellow; fracture, short; odour and taste not characteristic. 
Leaf  - Lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, 12-30 cm long, 1.5-3.5 cm broad, acuminate  
tubercle-based hispid hairs present on both surfaces; greenish to light yellow on top and  
white beneath. 
b)  Microscopic:
Stem - shows single-layered epidermis, covered with thick cuticle, some epidermal cells  
elongate to form long, warty, tubercle-based unicellular hairs, cortex differentiated in  
two zones, 5-7 layered outer collenchyrna, 3-4 layered inner parenchymatous cells,  
consisting of thin-walled, round to oval cells; phloem composed of usual elements;  
phloem fibres absent; xylem consisting of usual elements, vessels mostly solitary or  
rarely 2-3 in groups having spiral thickening, and fibres and tracheids having blunt tips  
and  simple  pits;  xylem  ray  not  distinct:  pith  consisting  of  round,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells. 
 55 Leaf -
Midrib  -single  layered  epidermis  with  thick  cuticle  and  long  warty,  tubercle-based  
unicellular hairs present on both surfaces followed by 5-7 layers of collenchymatous and  
3-4 layers parenchymatous cortical cells; vascular bundle situated centrally. 
Lamina  - isobilateral, single layered epidermis on either surface covered with thick  
cuticle, long warty, tubercle-based, simple, unicellular hairs present on both surfaces;  
palisade 2 layered, spongy parenchyma 8-10 layered, stomata paracytic
Powder  -  Greenish-brown;  shows  groups  of  oval  to  polygonal,  thin-walled straight  
epidermal cells; spiral vessels; a few fibres entire or in pieces, elongated with blunt tips;  
long warty, tubercle-based unicellular hairs and a few paracytic stomata. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than26Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than4Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 1Appendix 2.2.6
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol ; Acetic  
acid: Water (4 : 1 : 5) shows in visible light six spots at Rf. 0.38 (yellow), 0.55 (grey),  
0.62,  0.69  (both  yellow),  0.76  (grey)  and  0.99  (green).  Under  UV  (366  nm)  six  
fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.30 (pale blue), 0.55 (violet), 0.62, 0.69 (both yellow), 0.76  
(green) and 0.99 (red). On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots appear at Rf. 0.29, 0.38,  
0.46 (all yellow), 0.56 (grey), 0.62, 0.66 (both yellow), 0.76 and 0.99 (both grey). On  
spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten 
minutes, six spots appear at Rf. 0.29, 0.56, 0.62, 0.66, 0.76 and 0.99 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannin and Sugars.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Gr¡h¢, H¤dya, Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¡tala 
 
 56 IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - M¡nasa Mitra Va¶aka, Gojihv¡di Kv¡tha
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Raktapitta, KuÀ¶ha, Jvara, áv¡sa, K¡sa, Aruci, Prameha,  
Raktavik¡ra,Vra¸a, Danta Roga
DOSE - 3-6 g. of the drug in powder form.
 57 27. Granthiparni (Rt.)
GRANTHIPARÛÌ (Root)
Granthipar¸¢ consists of root of Leonotis nepetaefolia R. Br. (Fam. Lamiaceae),  
an ornamental herb or shrub, 1.2 -1.8 m high, cultivated and naturalized throughout the  
hotter parts of the country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:K¡kapuccha
Assam.:Granthika
Beng.:Hejurchei
Eng.:Knod Grass
Guj.:Hatisul
Hindi.:Gathivan
Kan.:--
Kash.:--
Mal.:--
Mar.:Dipmal
Ori.:--
Punj.:--
Tam.:--
Tel.:Ranathem
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root system well developed, numerous lateral roots arise from main root, about  
0.8 cm in dia., secondary and tertiary roots thin and fibrous, greyish coloured, main root  
slightly brownish coloured with a few longitudinal furrows; fracture, hard and short; no  
characteristic odour and taste. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature root shows a thin bark and a very wide xylem; cork exfoliating, generally  
detached, where present, consists of a few layers of tangentially elongated compressed  
cells possessing brown contents; secondary cortex, a narrow zone, composed of 3-6  
layers  or  more,  rounded,  irregular  or  tangentially  elongated,  thin-  walled,  
parenchymatous cells having brown contents; secondary phloem consists of thin-walled  
cells  of  sieve  elements;  fibres  absent;  secondary  xylem  forms  major  part  of  root  
consisting  of  vessels,  xylem  fibres  and  xylem  parenchyma;  vessels  more  or  less  
uniformly distributed throughout secondary xylem; vessels with bordered pits and of  
various shapes and sizes, a few having elongated projection at one or both ends; xylem  
fibres  elongated,  lignified  with  pointed  ends  with  moderately  wide  lumen;  xylem  
parenchyma rectangular or square in shape and pitted; medullary rays uni to triseriate,  
uni and biseriate rays being more common.
 58  
Powder - Brown; shows numerous parenchymatous cells of secondary cortex, a few  
fragments and entire xylem vessels with bordered pits, fibres and xylem parenchyma
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9 : 1) on exposure to Iodine vapour shows six spots at Rf. 0.04, 0.05, 0.08, 0.19, 0.23  
and 0.35 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the  
plate for ten minutes at 110 °C three spots appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.08 and 0.35 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS - Sterols. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphav¡tahara, Daurgandhyan¡¿ana 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - B¤hat Gu·£c¢ Taila, M¤tasa´j¢van¢ Sur¡
THERAPEUTIC USES - áw¡sa, Ka¸·u, ViÀa
DOSE - 5-10 g. of the drug in powder form.  
 59 28. Hamsapadi (W.P)
HAêSAPADÌ (Whole Plant)
HaÆsapad¢ consists of dried whole plant of  Adiantum lunulatum  Burm. (Fam. 
Polypodiaceae); a fern found throughout moist places, generally on the slopes of hills,  
ascending up to an elevation of about 1370 m.
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:HaÆsap¡d¢, Raktap¡d¢, Ki¶am¡t¡, Trip¡dik¡
Assam.:Sharul Arj, Sharujeena, Parsiyav
Beng.:Kali Jhat
Eng.:Maiden Hair
Guj.:Hansaraja
Hindi.:Hanspadee, Hansaraj
Kan.:Hamsapadi
Kash.:--
Mal.:--
Mar.:Hamsaraj
Ori.:--
Punj.:Hamsaraj
Tam.:--
Tel.:Hamsapadi
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root  -  Very  thin,  fibrous,  about  10-15  cm  long,  reddish-black  in  colour,  soft  and  
branched. 
Rhizome - Long, upto 2 mm thick, glabrous, prostrate or erect, dark reddish-brown or a  
black in colour.
Frond - Rachis shiny black, simply pinnate, pinna roughly lunulate, subdimidiate, lower  
edge nearly in line and oblique with its black shiny petiole, upper edge bluntly rounded  
and more or less lobed, a few sori in a continuous line on the under surface along the  
edge, with a false indusium.
b)  Microscopic:
Root mature root shows single layered epidermis consisting of thin-walled, small  
and  irregular  cells,  followed  by  3-4  layers  of  large  thick-walled,  polygonal,  
parenchymatous  cells  of  cortex;  endodermis  single  layered  composed  of  square  or  
somewhat  rounded  cells;  pericycle  single  layered  composed  of  square  shaped  
 60 sclerenchymatous thick and dark reddish-brown wall; pericycle encloses a diarch stele  
with a few elements of xylem and phloem.
Rhizome -  Mature  rhizome  consists  of  thick  walled,  rectangular,  small  cells  of  
epidermis, followed by 3-4 layers of sclerenchymatous cells of hypodermis, composed  
of thickwalled cells; cortex wide, made up  of  thin-walled, rounded or oval-shaped  
parenchymatous  cells,  enclosing  an  amphiphloic  siphonostele;  endodermis  present;  
vascular bundle with xylem consisting protoxylem towards both ends and metaxylem in  
centre;  phloem  surrounds  the  xylem  externally  and  also  internally;  tracheid  with  
scalariform to reticulate thickening present; a central pith consists of thick-walled cells,  
and fibres, and is sclerenchymatous.
Frond-
Petiole - Shows concave-convex outline; epidermis single layered; hypodermis consists  
of 2 or 3 layers, lignified, thick-walled, sclerenchymatous cells; ground tissue composed  
of oval to polygonal, thin-walled parenchymatous cells; stele single, slightly triangular  
in shape, located centrally and surrounded by peri cycle and endodermis.
Pinnule - Shows single layered epidermis on either surface; mesophyll round to oval in  
shape and not differentiated into palisade and spongy parenchyma; a few stomata present  
only on lower surface; a few sori also seen.
Powder -  Dark  reddish-brown  in  colour;  shows  dark  reddish-brown  pieces  of  
sclerenchymatous cells and light coloured crushed cells of cortex, a few tracheids having  
reticulate thickening, fibres and a few spores.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than16Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than11Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G'  plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4 :1 : 5) shows under UV (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.80 and  
0.96 (both blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.19, 0.30 and  
0.80 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating  
the plate for about ten minutes at 1l0 °C three spots appear at Rf. 0.19, 0.30 and 0.80 (all  
yellowish brown).
 61 PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :ViÀaghna, Raktavik¡rah¤ta 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - MadhuyaÀ¶y¡di Taila, M¡nasa Mitra Va¶aka,  
Mukt¡ Paµc¡m¤ta Rasa, Svar¸abh£pati Rasa,  
K¡lak£¶a Rasa.
THERAPEUTIC USES - Visarpa, Vra¸a, D¡ha, Atis¡ra, Lut¡ ViÀa, Bh£ta Graha,  
KakÀa Spho¶a, Rakta Vik¡ra
DOSE - 1-3 g. 
 62 29. Hapusha (Frt.)
HAPUâË (Fruit)
HapuÀ¡ consists of dried fruit of Juniperus communis Linn (Fam. Cupressaceae);  
a dense, more or less procumbent shrub, rarely a small tree, found in the Himalayas from  
Kumaon westwards at an altitude of 1500-4250 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:HavuÀ¡, Matsyagandha
Assam.:Arar, Abahal, Habbul
Beng.:Hayusha
Eng.:Juniper Berry, Common Juniper
Guj.:Palash
Hindi.:Havuber, Havubair
Kan.:Padma Beeja
Kash.:--
Mal.:--
Mar.:Hosh
Ori.:--
Punj.:Havulber
Tam.:--
Tel.:Hapusha
Urdu.:Abhal, Aarar
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Fruit sub-spherical, berry like, purplish-black, occasionally showing a 'bloom',  
about 0.5-1.0 cm in dia., apex shows triradiate mark and.depression indicating the suture 
of three fleshy-bracts; at the base are six, small, pointed, bracts arranged in 2 whorls, but  
occasionally 3 or 4 whorls present; three hard, triangular seeds are embedded in the  
fleshy mesocarp, each with a woody testa bearing large partly sunk oily glands; odour  
terebinthine and taste bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Outer layer of fruit shows 3-4, large, cubic or tabular cells having thick, brown  
porous walls externally covered by single layered, colourless cuticle; sarcocarp consists  
of large, elliptical, thin-walled, loosely coherent cells, containing drops of essential oil  
and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; oval to elongated, elliptical, triangular or  
irregular shaped cells abundant in this region; seed coat shows 2 or 3 layers of tabular,  
thin-walled cells covered externally by a thin cuticle and followed internally by a wide  
zone of thick-walled polygonal  sclerenchymatous cells; endosperm  and embryo not  
distinct.
 63 Powder - Brown; shows oval to elongated, elliptical and irregular shaped, thick-walled  
stone cells; rectangular to hexagonal, straight, thick walled epidermal cells in surface  
view; prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and oil globules. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 12Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 9Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9 : 1) shows under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.11 (light blue), 0.20  
(light blue) and 0.58 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour ten spots appear at Rf. 0.17,  
0.25, 0.30, 0.36, 0.46, 0.58, 0.64, 0.67, 0.90 and 0.96 (all yellow). On spraying with  
Vanillin Sulphuric acid and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C twelve spots 
appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.17, 0.25, 0.30 (all brown), 0.36 (light brown), 0.46, 0.52 (both  
brown), 0.58 (dirty yellow), 0.64 (brown), 0.73 (light brown), 0.90 (light brown) and  
0.96 (brown). 
CONSTITUENTS - Essential Oil and Flavonoids. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, M¤du 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphan¡¿aka, ViÀaghna, Agnid¢paka, V¡tan¡¿aka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Kum¡ry¡sava, Saptavinsitika Guggulu, D¡dhika Gh
¤ta, N¡r¡yana C£r¸a, TrayodaÀ¡´ga, Guggulu,  
Pradar¡ntaka Lauha, Nity¡nanda Rasa
THERAPEUTIC USES - Pittodara, Ar¿a, Graha¸¢, Gulma, á£la, K¤mi, V¡todara,  
Pl¢h¡roga
DOSE - 2-6 g. in powder form.
 64 30. Indravaruni (Frt.) 
INDRAVËRUÛÌ (Fruit)
Indrav¡ru¸¢  consists  of  dried/peeled  cut  pieces  of  the  fruit  of  Citrullus 
colocynthis Schrad. (Fam. Cucurbitaceae); an annual or perennial creeper growing wild  
in the warm, arid and sandy tracts of North West, Central and Southern parts of the  
country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Gav¡kÀ¢, Indravall¢, Aendr¢
Assam.:Gavadani
Beng.:Rakhal
Eng.:Colocynth
Guj.:Indrayan
Hindi.:Indrayan
Kan.:Havumekke
Kash.:--
Mal.:Kattu Vellarikkai, Valiya Pekkummatti
Mar.:Endrayana
Ori.:Gothakakudi, Indrayanalata, Garukhiya
Punj.:Indrayana
Tam.:Peitummatti
Tel.:Chedupuchcha, Peikummatti
Urdu.:Hanjal
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
White or pale yellowish-white, light, pithy fragments upto about 6 cm long and 2  
cm thick; externally convex with ridges and flattened areas 5-10 mm wide re ulting from 
peeling  with  a  knife;  internally  irregularly  concave  and  showing  numerous  ovoid  
depressions about 10 mm long, left by the removal of the seeds; pulp bitter, seeds  
flattened, ovoid, yellowish-white to dark brown, about 7 x 5 x 2 mm; endosperm narrow  
and oily; cotyledons 2, oily; radicle, small; epicarp woody, about I mm thick, buff  
coloured externally; odourless; taste, intensely bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Pulp consists of large, thin-walled, pitted parenchyma of rounded cells showing  
oval, flat, pitted areas where they are in contact with many slender bicollateral vascular  
strands having spiral vessels and occasional associated latex vessels; epicarp, where  
present, with epidermis of radially elongated cells having thick outer walls and thin  
inner  walls  and  partially  thickened  anticlinal  walls  with  occasional  stomata  of  the  
anomocytic type; the adjacent parenchymatous layer about 15 cells thick, and an inner  
layer of sclereids, the outer sclereids very thick, smaller, about 15 to 30 µ in diameter, 
 65 isodiaroetric and the inner sclereids layer upto about 60  µ, radially elongated, with  
thinner walls; seed, testa with outer epidermis of thick-walled unlignified palisade cells  
having ertical strips of thickening on the anticlinal walls, with inner layers of very thick-
walled, striated, pitted, lignified sclereids, and an inner most layer of sclereids with  
reticulately thickened walls; endosperm and cotyledons parenchymatous with fixed oil  
and aleurone grains upto 7 µ  in diameter. 
Powder - Yellowish-brown; shows, groups of pitted parenchymatous cells, annular and  
spiral vessels, stone cells, oil globules and aleurone grains measuring up to 7 µ  dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than14Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Light Petroleum soluble-
matterOn continuous extraction with light petroleum (b.p. 40 ° to 
60°) and drying at 100°C, not more than 3.0 percent.
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4: 1 :5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.88 (light  
blue) and 0.98 (yellow). On exposure to Iodine vapour two spots appear at Rf. 0.88 and  
0.98 (both yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Phosphomolybdic acid reagent and  
heating the plate for ten minutes at 105 °C four spots appear at Rf. 0.65 (blue), 0.84  
(blue), 0.96 (blue) and 0.98 (dark blue). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Resins - Resinous Glycosides (Colocynthin and Colocynthitin),  
A Phytosterol Glycoside, Citrullol, Pectin and Albuminoids,  
Cucurbitacins - Cucurbitacin E & I. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :K¤mighna, V¡maka, ViÀahara, Recana, áleÀmahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Javaraghni Gu¶ika (II)
THERAPEUTIC USES - K¤miroga, K¡mal¡, áv¡sa, K¡sa, KuÀ¶a, Gulma, Udararoga
DOSE - 0.125 - 0.5 g. of powder.
              0.25 - 0.5 g. of powder .
 66 31. Indrayava (Sd.)
INDRAYAVA (Seed)
Indrayava  consists  of  dried  seeds  of  Holarrhena  antidysenterica  Wall.  (Fam. 
Apocynaceae); a small to medium sized tree, found throughout India. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk:Bhadra Yava, Kali´ga, áakra, Vatsaka
Assam:Dudhkuri
Beng:Kurchi
Eng:Ester Tree, Conessi Seeds
Guj:Kuda, Kudo
Hindi:Indraju, Kurchi, Kuraiya
Kan:Kodasige Beeja
Kash:--
Mal:Kutakappala
Mar:Kudayache Beej
Ori:Kurei, Keruan
Punj:Indrajau, Kaurasakh, Kura
Tam:Kudasapalai
Tel:Kodisapala Vittulu, Palakodisa-Vittulu
Urdu:Tukhm-e-Kurchi, Indarjao Talkh
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Seeds compressed, linear, or oblong, elongated, margins curved inside, one side  
convex and other side concave with a longitudinal striation; 1-2 cm long, 0.2-0.3 cm  
thick, surface light yellowish- brown; odour, not distinct; taste, bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Seed shows 2-3 layered integument consisting of single layered, rounded, oval or  
radially elongated, thick-walled, reddish-brown parenchymatous cells, some of them  
elongate outwards forming small papillose structure, covered by a few unicellular, and  
uniseriate, multicellular types of trichomes; below this layer, 1 or 2 layers of small  
rounded or irregular cells, a few having single prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate,  
followed by a few layers of collapsed, brown coloured cells; endosperm 4-6 layered  
consisting of rounded, oval or polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, containing  
aleurone grains; most of the cells also contain oil globules; embryo having conical  
radicle and two foliaceous, convoluted cotyledons consisting of single layered tabular  
epidermal cells towards  dorsal side and rectangular  cells towards ventral side, and  
externally covered with cuticle; rest of the cotyledon cells composed of rounded, oval or  
rectangular parenchymatous cells containing rosette crystals of calcium oxalate and oil  
globules. 
 67 Powder - Light yellowish-brown; shows fragments of endosperm, pigment cells, oil  
globules, prismatic and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 12Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol  
(1:1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.67, 0.72, 0.76 and 0.93  
(all blue). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent followed by 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric  
acid reagent five spots appear at Rf. 0.15, 0.28, 0.43, 0.59 and 0.67 (all orange). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids -Steroidal Alkaloid, Conessine etc., Fats, Tannin and  
Resin. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Sa´gr¡h¢, TridoÀa¿¡maka 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Paµca Nimba C£r¸a, Pal¡¿a B¢j¡di C£r¸a, Laghu  
Gang¡dhara C£r¸a, K¤mi Ku¶h¡ra Rasa,  
Piy£savall¢ Rasa, Jvaraghni Gu¶ik¡, Siddha  
Pr¡ne¿vara Rasa, Ahiphen¡sava
THERAPEUTIC USES - Atis¡ra, KuÀ¶a, Jvar¡tis¡ra, K¤mi, Visarpa,  
Graha¸¢,Rakt¡tis¡ra, á£la, Chardi, Tvakroga, D¡ha
DOSE - 3-6 g. (C£rna). 
              20-30 g. (Decoction).
 68 32. Isvari (Rt.) 
ÌáVARÌ (Root)
Ì¿var¢  consists  of  dried  root  of  Aristolochia  indica  Linn,  (Fam. 
Aristolochiaceae); a perennial shrubby, twiner, found throughout the low hills and plains  
of India, 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Gandhn¡kul¢, N¡gadaman¢
Assam.:Jarvande
Beng.:Isheri
Eng.:Indian Birthwort, Serpent Root
Guj.:Ruhimool, Iswarimool
Hindi.:Ishwari
Kan.:Ishwari Beru, Toppalu
Kash.:--
Mal.:Karaleyan
Mar.:Sapsan
Ori.:Gopikaron
Punj.:--
Tam.:Perumarundu, Ichchuramule
Tel.:Iswari, Nallaiswari
Urdu.:Zarawand Hindi
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root considerably long, cylindrical, a few irregularly bent; 2-10 mm in dia;  
surface almost smooth with fine longitudinal wrinkles and transverse cracks; external  
surface,  light  greyish-brown;  inner  whitish;  fracture,  short  and  splintery;  odour,  
camphoraceous; taste, strongly bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Cork 8-10 layers, composed of tabular, thin-walled cells excepting the outer most  
layer,  having  thick-walled  cells  externally  and  filled  with  brownish  content;  cork  
cambium single layered; secondary cortex 15 to 17 layers of thin-walled, somewhat  
rounded and isodiametric cells in the outer region but tangentially elongated in the inner  
region; plenty of simple, round to oval starch grains measuring 5-18  µ in dia. and 
compound  starch grains having  2-4 components  measuring 10-15  µ in dia. and oil 
globules present in a few cells; in the middle region stone cells round, rectangular, oval  
or elongated present in small irregular patches having simple pits and radiating canals;  
centre occupied by xylem, split into strips of radiating arms by wedgeshaped masses of  
parenchyma; each xylem arm is capped by thin patches of phloem consisting of sieve  
 69 elements and phloem parenchyma, phloem fibres, and occasionally stone cells also found  
in this region; a ring of cambium present between phloem and xylem; xylem consists of  
large vessels, tracheids, fibres tracheids and parenchyma, all being lignified; in older  
roots,  tyloses  formation  takes  place  in  vessels;  medullary  rays  8  to  l0  in  number,  
multiseriate and dilating towards periphery and alternating with radiating arms of wood;  
scattered group of stone cells present in a few wider rays; micro-crystals with a few  
appearing as elongated small prisms and unaffected by acids, are present in a few  
cortical and ray cells. 
Powder -  Brownish-yellow;  fragments  of  cork  cells,  very  few,  oval  to  rectangular,  
lignified, thick-walled stone cells having distinct striations with narrow lumen, vessels  
with spiral thickenings, non-lignified, thick-walled tracheids, numerous simple, round to  
oval,  starch  grains  measuring  5-18  µ in  dia.,  and  compound  grains  having  2  to  4  
components, measuring 10 - 15 µ in dia., a few crystals and oil globules 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene. Ethylacetate  
(85 : 15) shows under UV (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf 0.21, 0.60 (both blue),  
0.89 (red), 0.96 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf 0.11, 0.21,  
0.50, 0.63, 0.96 and 0.98 (all yellow) On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent  
and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C three spots appear at Rf 0.14, 0.63 (both  
violet) and 0.96 (brown) 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids, Essential Oils, Bitter Principles and Fixed Oil.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphav¡ta¿¡maka, áothahara, RakÀoghna, Grahab¡dh¡ghna 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Mah¡viÀagarbha Taila, Gorocan¡di Gu¶ik¡
THERAPEUTIC USES - SarpaviÀa, L£t¡ ViÀa, Jalagardabha, V¤ÀcikaviÀa, Jvara,  
Krmi, Vra¸a
DOSE - 1-2 g. (For external use also).
 70 33. Jati (Lf.) 
JËTÌ (Leaf)
J¡t¢ consists of dried leaves of  Jasminum officinale  Linn. (Fam. Oleaceae); a  
large climbing shrub with dark green twigs and pinnate leaves, found in Kashmir at an  
altitude of 900 - 2700 m and cultivated throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk:M¡lat¢
Assam:Yasmeen
Beng:Chamelee
Eng:Jasmine
Guj:Chamelee
Hindi:Chamelee
Kan:Jati Maltiga, Sanna Jati Mallige
Kash:--
Mal:Pichi
Mar:Chamelee
Ori:--
Punj:Chamelee
Tam:Pichi, Jatimalli
Tel:Jati, Sannajati
Urdu:Chameli, Yasmeen
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Leaf single or in groups of 2-7 leaflets, upto 7.5 cm long and upto 2.5 cm broad;  
imparipinnately  compound;  terminal  leaflet  larger;  ovate  or  lanceolate,  acuminate;  
lateral leaflets shorter, acute, sessile or shortly petiolate; brownish-green; taste, bitter
b)  Microscopic:
Rachis  - Rachis shows more or less convex outline with two lateral wings; epidermis  
single layered covered by thick cuticle; hairs mostly unicellular with pointed apex,  
glandular rarely found only on the upper surface; collenchyma 2 - 5 layered; pericycle  
represented  by slightly  lignified  small fibre groups;  vascular  bundles  three, median  
crescent-shaped, small accessory bundle present in each wing. 
Midrib - shows similar structure as rachis; 3 - 5 layers of collenchymatous cells towards  
lower surface; pericycle present in the form of non-lignified fibre groups;  vascular  
bundle single and crescent-shaped. 
Lamina - shows dorsiventral structure, epidermis single layered on either side, covered  
by a thick striated cuticle; hairs as in rachis; palisade 1- 2 layered; spongy parenchyma  
4-6 layers; stomata anomocytic only in lower surface. 
 71 Powder - Yellowish-green; shows palisade and spongy parenchyma, unicellular hairs,  
fibres and vessels with spiral thickening, polygonal epidermal cells and anomocytic  
stomata in surface view.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 18Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 25Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene. Ethylacetate  
(9 :1) shows under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf 0.44 (blue), 0.52 (light  
blue) and 0.91 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapours ten spots appear at Rf. 0.08, 0.18,  
0.38,  0.44,  0.49,  0.53,  0.59,  0.67,  0.81  and  0.91  (all  yellow).  On  spraying  with  
Dragendorff  reagent  followed  by  5%  Methanolic-Sulphuric  acid  reagent  four  spots  
appear at Rf. 0.08, 0.18 (both orange), 0.44 and 0.91 (both light orange). On spraying  
with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C 
many spots of brown, yellow, blue and violet colour appear from the point of application  
to the solvent front. 
CONSTITUENTS  - Resin, Salicylic Acid, Alkaloid (Jasminine) and Essential Oil.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, M¤du, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :CakÀuÀya, áirovirecana 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  J¡ty¡di Taila,  J¡ty¡di Gh¤ta, Vasanta  
Kusum¡kara Rasa
THERAPEUTIC USES - áiroroga, AkÀiroga, ViÀaroga, KuÀ¶ha Vra¸a, Ar¿a,  
Mukhap¡ka, Putikar¸a, Stana áotha, Raktavik¡ra
DOSE - 10-20 g. of powder for decoction.
 72 34. Kadali ( Fr. Rz ) 
KADALÌ (Rhizome)
Kadal¢ consists of fresh rhizome of Musa paradisiaca Linn. (Fam. Musaceae);  
plant found cultivated throughout India, upto 1200 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:V¡ra¸¡, Ambus¡r¡, Rambh¡
Assam.:Kal, Talha
Beng.:Kela, Kala, Kanch Kala, Kodali
Eng.:Banana
Guj.:Kela
Hindi.:Kela
Kan.:Bale Gadde
Kash.:--
Mal.:Vazha
Mar.:Kela
Ori.:Kadali, Kadila
Punj.:Kela
Tam.:Vazhai
Tel.:Arati Gadda
Urdu.:Kela
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug  available  in  0.1-4  cm  thick,  transversely  cut  pieces,  pinkish-brown  to  
greyish-brown, occasionally attached with a few roots. 
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9 : 1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf 0.25 (orange) and 0.33  
(green). On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.25 and 0.73 (all  
yellow). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil and 4 α -Methyl Sterol Ketone. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :á¢ta, Guru, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya, D¢pana, Kaphahara, Ke¿ya, Pittahara, R£cya 
 73  IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Abhraka Bhasma (áatapu¶¢), KÀ¡ra Taila
THERAPEUTIC USES - K¤mi, KuÀ¶ha, Kar¸a á£la, Somaroga, Amlapitta, D¡ha,  
Raktavik¡ra, RajodoÀa, Mutrak¤cchra
DOSE - 10-20 g. in powder form. 
             10-20 ml in juice form.
 74 35. Kakajangha (Rt) 
KËKAJA×GHË (Root)
K¡kaja´gh¡  consists  of  dried  root  of  Peristrophe  bicalyculala  Nees  (Fam. 
Acanthaceae) an erect, hispid,  herb or undershrub, 60-180 cm high found in forest  
undergrowth, hedges and waste lands almost throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS - 
Sansk:Nad¢k¡nt¡, K¡katikt¡, Pr¡cibal¡, Suloma¿¡
Assam:--
Beng:Nasabhaga, Naskaga
Eng:--
Guj:Kaliadhedi, Kariadhedi, Lasiadhedi
Hindi:Atrilal, Itrelal, Masi, Nasbhanga, Kakajangha
Kan:Cibigid, Cibirsoppu
Kash:--
Mal:--
Mar:Chatipittapapada, Ramkirayat, Pitpapra
Ori:--
Punj:--
Tam:Chebisa
Tel:Chibira
Urdu:--
DESCRIPTION - 
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root occurs upto 0.7 cm thick, and upto 4 cm long cylindrical with branched  
lateral roots, dirty brown; fracture, fibrous; odour and taste not characteristic. 
b)  Microscopic:
Shows poorly developed cork, consisting of 2-4 layers of tangentially elon ated, 
thin-walled cells; where cork is not developed, epidermis present, consisting of single  
layered  cells;  secondary  cortex  narrow,  consisting  of  5-7  layers  of  elliptical  or  
tangentially elongated, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; secondary phloem narrow,  
consisting of sieve elements and parenchyma; phloem rays not distinct; secondary xylem  
consisting of pitted vessels, fibres, tracheids and parenchyma; vessels occur singly or in  
groups of 2-4 or more and arranged radially throughout secondary xylem; vessels with  
simple pits, tracheids thick-walled and lignified. 
Powder - Dirty-brown; shows parenchymatous cells, aseptate fibres and pitted vessels.
 75 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than9Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G'  plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(93:7) shows under U.V. (366 nm) five fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.15, 0.30, 0.52, 0.90  
and 0.98 (all light blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.15,  
0.30, 0.43, 0.57 and 0.98 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent  
and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C five spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.30, 0.43,  
0.57 and 0.98 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Volatile Oil.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Picchila, Sara 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, Var¸ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Ëragvadh¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a
THERAPEUTIC USES - Vra¸a, Jvara, Raktapitta, Ka¸·u, K¤mi, KuÀ¶ha, Raktavik¡ra,  
ViÀa Vik¡ra, Siddhma, álipada, Balagraha, Aik¡hikjvara,  
B¡dhirya, Anidr¡, R¡jayjakÀm¡, Pradara, Dantk¤imi, SarpviÀa
DOSE - 1-5 g. in powder form.
 76 36. Kakanasika (Sd)
KËKANËSIKË (Seed)
K¡kan¡sik¡  consists of dried seed of Martynia annua Linn. Syn. M diandra Glox. 
(Fam. Martyniaceae); an annual herb found throughout the country in waste places. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:K¡k¡´g¢, áirobal, Cerasnaya
Assam.:--
Beng.:Kurki, Kaih, Baghnoki
Eng.:Tiger’s Claw, Devil’s Claw
Guj.:--
Hindi.:Bichu Hathajori, Kawathodi
Kan.:Garuda Mugu
Kash.:--
Mal.:--
Mar.:Vinchuachajada
Ori.:--
Punj.:Kaktundi, Bichu, Hathajari
Tam.:Kakatundi
Tel.:Garudamukku, Telukondikaya
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Seed oblong, hard, woody, 2-5 cm long and 1.5-1.7 cm wide; surface wrinkled,  
light brown to black; two sharp recurved hooks present at anterior end; four prominent  
grooves present each on convex and concave side and on lateral sides, 2-4 hairy spines  
present inside groove on concave side; no taste and odour. 
Powder-  Black  and  rough;  shows  groups  of  thick-walled  cells,  numerous  fibres,  
unicellular hairs and oil globules. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
 77 T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9:1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.66 and 0.95 (both blue).  
On exposure to Iodine vapour four spots appear at Rf.  O.11, 0.42, 0.57 and 0.95 (all  
yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten  
minutes at 1050 C four spots appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.42, 0.57 and 0.95 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil- (Semidrying type).
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :á¢ta 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Pittaghna, Dardhyakara, Ras¡yana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Cyavanpr¡¿a, Aveleha, TryuÀan¡di Gh¤ta
THERAPEUTIC USES - Palita
DOSE - 2-5 g.
 78 37. Kakoli (Tub.Rt) 
KËKOLÌ (Tuberous Root)
K¡kol¢  consists  of  dried  tuberous  root  of  Lilium  polyphyllum  D.Don  (Fam. 
Liliaceae); a plant found growing in Western temperate Himalayas from 1800-3600 m  
from Kumaon to Kashmir. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:V¡yasol¢, Sv¡dum¡nisi
Assam.:--
Beng.:Kakoli
Eng.:--
Guj.:Kakoli
Hindi.:Kakoli
Kan.:Kakoli
Kash.:--
Mal.:Kakoli
Mar.:Kakoli
Ori.:Kakoli
Punj.:--
Tam.:Kakoli
Tel.:Kakoli, Kakoli Moola, Kandhambu
Urdu.:Kakoli
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Roots straight or curved, dark brown and occur in bunches of 4-15; each root  
about 2-10 cm long, upto 0.7 cm thick; external surface rough due to presence of  
longitudinal wrinkles; odour, slightly aromatic; taste, acrid. 
b)  Microscopic:
Tuberous root shows ridges and furrows in outline; cork 8-10 layered, consisting  
of thin-walled, tangentially elongated, almost radially arranged cells, upper cells filled  
with reddish-brown content; secondary cortex consisting of oval to elongated, thin-
walled, parenchymatous cells filled with abundant, simple, ovoid to ellipsoidal starch  
grains, measuring 5-11 µ in dia.; vascular bundles composed of usual elements, vessels  
arranged  alternatively  with  phloem  patches,  vessels  mostly  solitary  with  spiral  
thickening; pith composed of oval to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells.
 
Powder - Greenish-yellow; slightly aromatic in smell; shows spiral vessels, fragments of  
cork cells and simple, ovoid to ellipsoidal starch grains, measuring 5-11 µ in dia. 
 79 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9 : 1) shows in visible light two spots at Rf. 0.84 (yellow) and 0.97 (light yellow).  
Under UV (366 nm) five fluorescent zones visible at Rf. 0.23, 0.31 (both yellow), 0.44  
(light yellow), 0.54 and 0.97 (both blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour thirteen spots  
appear at Rf. 0.15, 0.22, 0.23, 0.25, 0.31, 0.44, 0.54, 0.68, 0.78, 0.84, 0.88, 0.92 and 0.97  
(all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for  
ten minutes at 110 °C five spots appear at Rf. 0.44, 0.54, 0.78, 0.84 and 0.97 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sugars.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :á¢ta, Guru 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :B¤Æha¸a, Pittahara, V¡tahara, Sukrala 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - B¤hat A¿vagandh¡ Gh¤ta,  B¤hat Ch¡gal¡dya Gh
¤ta, Da¿mul¡riÀ¶a, áiv¡ Gu¶ik¡,  
Am¤tapr¡¿a Gh¤ta.
THERAPEUTIC USES - Raktapitta, áoÀa, Jvara, Sv¡sa, K¡sa, KÀaya, D¡ha.
DOSE - 3-6 g.
 80 38. Kamala (Rz.) 
KAMALA (Rhizome)
Kamala consists of  dried rhizome with roots attached at nodes  of  Nelumbo 
nucifera  Gaertn.  Syn.  Nelumbium  nelumbo  Druce,   N.  speciosum  Willd.  (Fam. 
Nymphaeaceae); an aquatic herb, with stout creeping rhizome found in lakes and ponds  
throughout the warmer parts of the country, ascending upto 1000 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Padnakanda, S¡luka, Ambhoruha
Assam.:Kamal Kakdi
Beng.:--
Eng.:Sacred Lotus
Guj.:Loda
Hindi.:Kamal Kand, Kamal Kakdi
Kan.:Tavare Kande
Kash.:--
Mal.:Tamara Kizangu
Mar.:Kamal Kand
Ori.:Padma
Punj.:Kaul, Bhein
Tam.:Tamardi Kizangu
Tel.:Tamara Gadda
Urdu.:Kanwal Kakdi
DESCRIPTION - 
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug  occurs  as  cut  pieces  of  rhizome  with  distinct  nodes  and  internodes,  
cylindrical,  0.5-2.5  cm  in  dia., longitudinally  marked  with  brown  patches,  smooth,  
yellowishwhite to yellowish-brown; root adventitious, less developed, 0.5-1 mm thick,  
attached to node of rhizome; dark brown. 
b)  Microscopic:
Rhizome - Shows a single layered epidermis followed internally by 2-4 layered lignified  
cells; cortex differentiated into three regions; outer cortex consisting of a wide zone of  
isodiametric  thin-walled  cells  of  which  outer  5-6  layers  collenchymatous  and  rest  
parenchymatous, having intercellular spaces and groups of fibres; middle cortex mostly  
composed  of  air  cavities  traversed  by  trabeculae  of  thin-walled  small  and  nearly  
isodiametric cells; inner cortex forming central core, consists of spherical cells enclosing  
large intercellular spaces; vascular strands consists of scattered closed vascular bundles  
surrounded  by  thick-walled,  lignified  sclerenchymatous  fibres,  resembling  a  
monocotyledonous  structure;  vessels  having  spiral  and  spiro-reticulate  thickening;  
phloem composed of sieve tubes and companion cells; air cavities large, elliptic or  
 81 rounded, largest at middle cortex and smaller towards inner cortex; air cavities lined by  
thin-walled, elongated, parenchymatous epithelial cells; starch grains abundant, rounded  
to oval, mostly simple, rarely compound measuring 8-27 µ in dia., loaded in cells.
 
Root - Appears more or less circular in outline, epidermis consists of oval, thin-walled  
parenchymatous cells; cortex composed of 5-8 layers of oval to polygonal, thin-walled  
parenchymatous cells, vascular elements surrounded by slightly lignified endodermis;  
phloem cells, xylem fibres aseptate with blunt ends; vessels with spiral thickening,  
rounded to oval, poorly developed and consisting of usual elements; xylem composed of  
vessels, tracheids and parenchyma; vessels and tracheids have simple pits. 
Powder -Light brown; shows groups of oval to elongated, parenchymatous cells, xylem  
fibres aseptate with blunt ends; vessels with spiral thickening, rounded to oval simple  
starch grains measuring 8-27 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than14Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than3.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 6.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol  
(4:1) shows in visible light one spot at Rf. 0.97 (light yellow). Under U.V. (366 nm)  
seven fluorescent zones visible at Rf. 0.06 (blue), 0.13 (blue) 0.43 (blue) 0.55 (blue),  
0.78 (blue) 0.91 (blue) and 0.98 (reddish). On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots  
appear at Rf. 0.13, 0.31, 0.45, 0.64, 0.76, 0.86, 0.93 and 0.96 (all yellow). On spraying  
with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid and heating the plate for about ten minutes at 110 °C 
four spots appear at Rf. 0.10 (grey), 0.64 (brown), 0.76 (brown) and 0.96 (brown). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Starch and Reducing Sugars. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Lava¸a, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :CakÀuÀya, K¤mighna, Kaphahara, Pittahara, R£cya, V¤Àya, Var¸ya,  
ViÀaghna,  ViÀambhakara,  D¡ha¿¡maka,  RaktaduÀ¶ihara,  Durjara,  
Stanyajanana, Sangr¡h¢, Mutravirecan¢ya, V¡takara. 
 
 82 IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Gu·ucy¡di Modaka
THERAPEUTIC USES - D¡ha, T¤Àna, Chardi, Raktapitta, Murch¡, K¡sa, V¡tagulma,  
Visarpa, Visphota, Mutrak¤chra, Dansodbhava, Jvara, Bhrama,  
áoÀa, H¤droga
DOSE - 10-20 ml. of the drug in juice form. 
               5-10 g.  of the drug in powder form.
 83 39. Karavira (Rt) 
KARAV¢RA (Root)
Karav¢ra  consists of dried root of Nerium indicum Mill, Syn. N. odorum Soland 
(Fam. Apocynaceae); a large glabrous, evergreen, woody shrub with milky juice, found  
throughout the year in upper Gangetic plains, Himalayas from Nepal to Kashmir upto  
2000 m, Central and Southern India; also cultivated near the temples and gardens. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:DivyapuÀpa, áatakumbha, A¿vam¡raka, Hayamara.
Assam.:Diflee, Sammulhimar
Beng.:Karbbe, Karbee
Eng.:Sweet-Scented Oleander
Guj.:Kaner
Hindi.:Kaner
Kan.:Kanagilu, Kharjahar, Kanigale, Kanagile
Kash.:--
Mal.:Kanaveeram
Mar.:Kanher
Ori.:--
Punj.:Kanir
Tam.:Sevvarali, Arali
Tel.:Kastooripatte, Errugumeru
Urdu.:Kaner
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug available in cut pieces, 0.5-2.6 cm thick, branched, cylindrical, external  
surface greyish with long irregular streaks caused by rupture of bark, internal surface  
cream coloured; fracutre, short; taste, bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Root shows cork consisting of 5-12 layered, thin-walled, rectangular, compactly  
arranged,  parenchymatous  cells,  with  a  few  outer  layers  occasionally  exfoliated;  
secondary cortex consisting of 6-10 layers of oval, tangentially elongated, thin walled, 
parenchymatous  cells,  a  few  thick-walled  laticiferous  cells  present  in  this  region;  
secondary phloem composed of oval to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatus cells;  
secondary xylem consisting of usual elements, having pitted vessels, fibres with pointed  
tips; xylem rays usually uniseriate and rarely biseriate; prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate and simple starch grains scattered in secondary cortex, secondary phloem and  
phloem rays; simple, oval to round, elliptical starch grains measuring 3-11  µ in dia., 
found-scattered in cortical cells, phloem and xylem rays. 
 84 Powder - Greyish-brown; shows thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, fragments of cork  
cells, pitted xylem fibres and vessels, a few prismatic crystals of calcium  oxalate,  
simple, round to oval, elliptical starch grains measuring 3-11 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than7.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than3.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol  
(8 : 2) shows under U.V. (366 nm) ten fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.11, 0.15 (both yellow)  
0.19  (blue),  0.26  (yellow),  0.49  (pink),  0.60,  0.64,  0.72,  0.88  (all  blue)  and  0.95  
(yellow). On exposure to Iodine vapour ten spots appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.22, 0.30, 0.49,  
0.53, 0.64, 0.68, 0.72, 0.90 and 0.95 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic  
Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105°C for about ten minutes eleven spots  
appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.11, 0.22, 0.30, 0.49, 0.53 (all grey) 0.64 (yellow), 0.68, 0.72 (both  
grey), 0.90 (violet) and 0.95 (brown). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycosides-Cardiac Glycosides and Resinous Matter.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :áirovirecana,  CakÀuÀya,  K¤mighna,  áothaghna,  Ka¸·ughna,  
KuÀ¶hhara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - B¤hanmaric¡dya Taila, Karavir¡dya Taila
THERAPEUTIC USES - Vra¸a, Upadan¿a, KuÀ¶ha, Jalodara, Ka¸·u.
DOSE - 30-125 mg. of the drug in powder form.
 85 40. Karamarda (Rt.) 
KARAMARDA (Root)
Karamarda consists of dried root of Carissa carandas Linn. (Fam. Apocynaceae);  
a dichotomously branched large shrub or small tree with strong simple or forked thorns  
in pairs, found throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk:Karamla, Karamardaka
Assam:--
Beng:Karamacha
Eng:--
Guj:Karamada
Hindi:Karaonda, Karaondi
Kan:Karayige
Kash:--
Mal:Modakam
Mar:Karabanda
Ori:--
Punj:--
Tam:Kalakkai
Tel:Vaka, Karavande
Urdu:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root  considerably  long,  often  irregularly  bent,  woody,  cylindrical;  rusty  or  
yellowish-brown; 1-1.5 cm thick; surface smooth; fracture, hard; odour and taste, not  
distinct. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature root shows a stratified cork, lignified and tangentially elongated cells,  
consisting of alternating bands of smaller and larger cells; a few inner layers filled with  
red contents; secondary cortex very narrow, composed of 1 or 2 layers of thinwalled  
cells;  secondary  phloem  composed  of  usual  elements  having  a  number  of  cavities,  
present in a row just below the secondary cortex; a number of stone cells present in large  
compact  patches  in  different  rows,  in  outer  and  inner  phloem  regions  interrupting  
phloem rays; phloem rays uni-to biseriate; prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate occur in  
a number of cells throughout phloem region; cambium not distinct; secondary xylem  
very wide consisting of xylem vessels, fibres, tracheids and xylem parenchyma, all  
elements being lignified, xylem rays uni to biseriate, consisting of radially elongated  
cells; simple, round to oval, starch grains measuring 5.5-11 µ in dia., present throughout.  
 86 Powder - Yellowish-brown; shows patches of stratified cork, xylem fibres, stone cells,  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and simple, round to oval, starch grains, measuring  
5.5 - 11 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9: 1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) a conspicuous fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.07 (sky blue).  
On exposure to Iodine vapour four spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.26, 0.46 and 0.80 (all  
yellowish brown). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating  
the plate for about ten minutes at 110 °C five spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.26, 0.46, 0.80  
and 0.92 (all violet).
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycosides -Cardiac Glycosides. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :M£trala, V¡maka 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Marma Gu¶ik¡
THERAPEUTIC USES - M£tra Roga, Visphota, Vidradh¢, Vra¸a.
DOSE - 1-3 g. of the drug in powder form.
 87 41. Karamarda (Rt. Stock) 
KËáA  (Root Stock)
K¡¿a  consists  of  dried  root  stock  with  attached  stem  portion  of  Saccharum 
spontaneum  Linn.  (Fam.  Poaceae),  a  perennial  grass  with  slender  culms,  found  
throughout the country in warmer parts ascending upto 1,800 m in the Himalayas. 
SYNONYMS - 
Sansk.:K¡¿a, ávetac¡mara
Assam.:--
Beng.:Chhote-Kase, Kash, Keshe
Eng.:Thatch-Grass
Guj.:Kansado, Kansa, Kansado, Ghans
Hindi.:Kans, Kasa
Kan.:Kirayikagachchha, Kasalu
Kash.:--
Mal.:Nannana, Kusa, Kuruvikarimpu
Mar.:Kasai
Ori.:--
Punj.:Kani
Tam.:Nanal, Nanalu, Karumbu, Kasa, Amaver
Tel.:Kakicheraku, Relu
Urdu.:Kansa, Kasa
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug  occurs  in  the  form  of  root  stock  with  attached  stem  portions  having  
numerous dark brown roots; cylindrical, yellowish-brown to brown, 2-25 cm or more in  
length and 0.2-1 cm thick; fracture, splintery. 
b)  Microscopic:
Root stock shows single layered epidermis, consisting of slightly oval, thin walled 
cells, a few elongated, pointed, aseptate, long unicellular hairs arise from epidermis;  
cortex composed of 2-3 layered, elongated, thick- walled, palisade-like cells and 3-4  
layers of thin-walled, oval to polygonal parenchymatous cells; endoderm is consisting of  
thin-  walled,  single  layered  cells,  followed  by  6-9  layered,  thick-walled,  lignified,  
polygonal,  continuous  ring  of  sclerenchymatous  cells;  pericycle  single  layered,  
composed of very small, thin-walled cells beneath endoderm is; ground tissues wide,  
composed of thin-walled, oval to polygonal, elongated parenchymatous cells having  
numerous, round to oval starch grains measuring 8-24  µ in dia., scattered 'U'  shaped 
vascular bundle with sheath, also seen in this region. 
 88 Powder - Dark brown; shows fragments of thin-walled, tabular, somewhat rectangular,  
epidermal cells in surface view, oval to polygonal: thin-walled parenchymatous and  
thick-walled polygonal sclerenchymatous cells, pointed unicellular hairs, vessels with  
reticulate thickening, small round to oval starch grains, measuring 8-24 µ in dia.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4:1:5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) one fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.83 (green).  
On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.30, 0.83 and 0.90 (all yellow).  
On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten  
minutes at 105°C six spots appear at Rf. 0.13, 0.23, 0.30 (all dull yellow), 0.69, 0.83 and  
0.90 ( all grey).
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Sara 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Pittahara, V¤Àya, Balak¤t, Srmahara, R£cik¤t 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Karp£r¡dyarka, Brahma Ras¡yana, Sukum¡ra Gh
¤ta, Traika¸¶aka Gh¤ta, T¤¸apancam£la Kv¡tha  
C£r¸a, M£travirecan¢ya KaÀ¡ya C£r¸a,  
Stanyajanana KaÀ¡ya C£r¸a, A¿mar¢hara KaÀ¡ya  
C£r¸a
THERAPEUTIC USES - Raktapitta, M£tarak¤cchra, A¿mar¢, D¡ha, RaktadoÀa, áoÀa,  
KÀaya
DOSE - 3-6 g. of the drug in powder form. 
 89 42. Katphala (Frt.) 
KAÙPHALA  (Fruit)
Ka¶phala consists of dried fruit of Myrica esculenta Buch.- Ham. ex D. Don Syn.  
M. nagi  Hook.f. (Fam. Myricaceae); a dioecious, evergreen, small or moderate sized  
tree, 3-15 m high, found in sub-tropical Himalayas from Ravi eastwards to Assam, and  
in Khasi, Jaintia, Naga and Lushai hills a elevation of 900-2100 m, 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Mah¡valkala
Assam.:Ajooree, Vdulbark
Beng.:Kayachhal, Katphal, Kayphal
Eng.:Box Myrtle, Bay Berry
Guj.:Kayphal
Hindi.:Kayphajl
Kan.:Kadujai Kai, Katphala, Kirisivari, Kirishivane
Kash.:--
Mal.:Marut
Mar.:Kaayphal
Ori.:--
Punj.:Kanphal, Kayphal
Tam.:Marudam, Marudampatai
Tel.:Kaidaryamu
Urdu.:Kaiphal
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Fruit  - A drupe, ellipsoid or ovoid, 0.7-1.0 cm long, 0.5-0.7 cm wide, dark brown,  
surface tubercled, very hard; taste, sourish sweet. 
Seed - Ovoid, 0.6 cm long, 0.3 cm wide, surface very smooth, light brown; taste, oily.
b)  Microscopic:
Fruit - Shows epicarp cells isodiametric in surface view, mass of reddish-brown, thin -
walled,  parenchymatous  cells,  a  few  elongated  tubercled  cells  with  smooth  walls;  
endocarp hard and stony consisting of sclerenchymatous cells.
 
Seed - Seed coat shows single layered, thick, brown coloured cells; cotyledons composed  
of  single  layered,  thin-walled  epidermal  cells  containing  oil  gloubles  and  aleurone  
grains; mesophyll cells thin-walled, isodiametric, fully packed with oil gloubles and  
aleurone grams.
 90 Powder - Yellowish-brown; shows rectangular to hexagonal, thin-walled seed coat and  
polygonal epidermal cells in surface view; tubercled parenchymatous cells, oil globules  
and aleurone grains.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than2.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 15Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 17Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'GF 254' plate using n -Butanol: 
Acetic acid: Water (4:1:5) shows in visible light five spots at Rf. 0.25, 0.43, 0.57, 0.75  
(all grey) and 0.88 (yellowish green). Under U.V. (366 nm) seven fluorescent zones are  
visible at Rf. 0.09, 0.18 and 0.30 (all light blue), 0.43 (green), 0.49 (blue), 0.65 (blue)  
and 0.71 (pink). On exposure to Iodine vapour eleven spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.09,  
0.12, 0.25, 0.30, 0.35, 0.43, 0.52, 0.57, 0.75 and 0.88 (all yellow). On spraying with 5%  
Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C six 
spots appear at Rf. 0.09 (black), 0.30 (black), 0.57 (light brown), 0.71 (light pink), 0.82  
(light pink) and 0.88 (yellowish green). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Waxy Material.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphav¡tahara,  R£cya,  D¡hahara,  Mukharoga¿¡maka,  
Dh¡tuvik¡r¡jit 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - B¤hatphala Gh¤ta, PuÀy¡nuga C£r¸a, Arimed¡di  
Taila, Bal¡ Taila, Mah¡viÀagarbha Taila,  
Khadir¡di Gu¶ika (Mukha Roga), Khadir¡di  
Gu¶ik¡ (K¡sa), Mah¡ V¡tagaj¡´ ku¿a Rasa.
THERAPEUTIC USES - Gulma, Meha, Jvara, Ar¿a, Graha¸¢, P¡¸·u Roga, H¤all¡sa,  
Mukha Roga, K¡sa, Sv¡sa
DOSE - 3-5 g.
 91 43. Katphala (St.Bk.)
KAÙPHALA  (Stem Bark)
Ka¶phala consists of dried stem bark of Myrica esculenta Buch.- Ham. ex D. Don,  
Syn. M. nagi Hook.f. (Fam. Myricaceae); a dioecious evergreen, small or moderate sized  
tree, 3-15 m high, found in subtropical Himalayas from Ravi eastward to Assam, Khasi,  
Jaintia, Naga and Lushai hills upto an elevation of 900-2100 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Mah¡valkala
Assam.:Ajooree Vdulbark
Beng.:Kaychhal, Katphal, Kayphal
Eng.:Box Myrtle, Bay Berry
Guj.:Kayphal
Hindi.:Kayphal
Kan.:Kadujai Kai, Katphala, Kirisivari, Kirishivane
Kash.:--
Mal.:Marut
Mar.:Kaayphal
Ori.:--
Punj.:Kanphal, Kayphal
Tam.:Marudam, Marudampatai
Tel.:Kaidaryamu
Urdu.:Kaiphal
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug occurs in pieces of variable length, 1-2.5 cm thick, slightly quilled, fissured  
longitudinally  and  transversely,  outer  surface  rough,  grey  to  brownish-grey,  inner  
surface dark brown and smooth; fracture, hard; taste, bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature stem bark shows multilayered cork, composed of rectangular, tangentially  
elongated, thin-walled cells, some filled with red contents; secondary cortex a wide  
zone,  composed  of  thin-walled,  rectangular  to  polygonal,  parenchymatous  cells,  a  
number of cells filled with red colouring matter and simple, round to oval starch grains  
measuring 6-11  µ in dia.; a number of stone cells, in singles or in groups, circular  
polygonal or oval, thick-walled, lignified with simple pits and radiating canals, found  
scattered throughout secondary cortex; secondary phloem consists of sieve elements,  
phloem fibres, crystal fibres, stone cells and phloem parenchyma traversed by phloem  
rays; numerous  prismatic crystals  of calcium oxalate present in secondary phloem;  
phloem fibres with blunt or pointed end and highly thick-walled, with very narrow  
lumen present in groups; stone cells similar to those found in secondary cortex, mostly  
 92 in  singles  or  in  groups  of  2-3, sometimes  associated  with  fibre groups  in  phloem  
parenchyma; in isolated preparation and tangential sections crystal fibres show more  
than  twenty  chambers  having  single  prismatic  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate  in  each  
chamber;  a  number  of  phloem  parenchyma  cells  containing  red  colouring  matter;  
phloem rays 1-4 seriate, containing red colouring matter. 
Powder - Rusty red; shows a number of stone cells, phloem fibres, crystal fibres and  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and simple, round to oval, starch grains measuring  
6-11 µ in dia.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 13Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 12Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(7 : 3) in visible light shows four spots at Rf. 0.08 (grey), 0.32 (yellow), 0.51 (grey) and  
0.58 (yellow). Under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent zones appear at Rf. 0.49, 0.67 (both  
light blue) and 0.86 (blue). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-sulphuric acid reagent and  
heating the plate at 110 °C for ten minutes six spots appear at Rf 0.08, 0.21 (both grey),  
0.35 (Pink), 0.52, 0.67 and 0.80 (all grey). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannin and Glycosides.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¡hahara,  Dh¡tuvik¡r¡jit,  Kaphav¡tahara,  Mukharoga¿¡maka,  
Kahaphal¡di Nasya 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - B¤hatphala Gh¤ta, PuÀy¡nuga C£r¸a, Arimed¡di  
Taila, Bal¡ Taila, Mah¡viÀagarbha Taila,  
Khadir¡di Gu¶ika (Mukha Roga), Khadir¡di  
Gu¶ik¡ (K¡sa), Mah¡ V¡tagaj¡´ Ku¿a Rasa.
THERAPEUTIC USES - Gulma, Meha, Jvara, Ar¿a, Graha¸¢, P¡¸·u Roga, H¤ll¡sa,  
Mukha Roga, K¡sa, Sv¡sa, Agnim¡ndhya, Aruchi, Ka¸¶haroga
DOSE - 3-5 g.
 93 44. Kola (Frt. Pulp)
KOLA (Fruit Pulp)
Kola consists of dried fruit pulp (devoid of seed) of Zizyphus mauritiana Lam. 
Syn. Z.  jujuba  Lam. (Fam. Rhamnaceae); a small, evergreen sub-deciduous tree, wild  
and also extensively cultivated throughout the country and found in Himalayan region  
upto about 1370 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Kol¢, Badar¢
Assam.:Vagari
Beng.:Kul Vadar, Vadar, Vadai, Narkolikul
Eng.:Jujube
Guj.:Bor
Hindi.:Desi Ber
Kan.:Borehannu
Kash.:--
Mal.:Lanta, Lantakkura
Mar.:Bor
Ori.:Borakoli
Punj.:Desi ber
Tam.:Ilandai
Tel.:Regi
Urdu.:Ber
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Pulp pieces irregular in shape, shrunk, with external surface smooth and glossy, 2  
mm in thickness, brittle, colour, orange red; odour, not distinct; taste, sour.
b)  Microscopic:
Fruit  pulp  shows  single  layered  epicarp  consisting  of  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells, covered with thin layer of cuticle; mesocarp differentiated into  
two  zones,  outer  zone  consisting  of  5-10  layers  of  rectangular,  thin-walled,  
parenchymaous  cells,  inner  mesocarp  consisting  of  oval  to  polygonal,  thin-walled,  
crushed parenchymatous cells, most of the mesocarp cells filled with reddish-brown  
substance, which is tannin when tested; a few fibro- vascular bundles found scattered in  
this region, 
Powder - Orange; shows round to oval, thin-walled, reddish-brown cells of meso carp,  
slightly thick-walled, polygonal epicarp cells in surface view. 
 94 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than4.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 25Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 45Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (9: 1: 10) shows under UV (366 nm) a fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.34 (light  
blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.17, 0.34, 0.43,  
0.54, 0.66 and 0.84 (all yellow). On spraying with 60 % Methanolic-Sulphuric acid  
reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 120 °C five spots appear at Rf. 0.17, 0.34  
(both black), 0.43, 0.66 and 0.84 (all grey). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric  
acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C two spots appear at Rf. 0.17  
and 0.34 (both black). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Vitamin C, Sugars and Minerals.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Dipana, Gr¡h¢, R£cya, V¡tahara, P¡cana 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Dh¡nvantara Taila, Yav¡n¢ â¡dhava
THERAPEUTIC USES - D¡ha, Raktavik¡ra, T¤À¸a, Aruci.
DOSE - 3-6 g. (Dried Pulp).
 95 45. Kola (St.Bk.) 
KOLA (Steam Bark)
Kola consists of dried stem bark of  Zizyphus mauritiana  Lam. Syn Z.  jujuba 
Lam.  (Fam  Rhamnaceae);  a  small,  evergreen  sub-deciduous  tree,  wild  and  also  
extensively cultivated throughout the country and found on Himalayan region upto about  
1370 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Kol¢, Badara, Badar¢, Karkandh£
Assam.:Bagori, Bayur
Beng.:Kula
Eng.:Jujube
Guj.:Bor
Hindi.:Desi Ber
Kan.:Boehannumara
Kash.:--
Mal.:Lanta
Mar.:Bor
Ori.:Borakali
Punj.:Desi ber
Tam.:Ilandai
Tel.:Regi, Regu
Urdu.:Ber
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Bark available in pieces of variable length, usually 0.6 - 1 cm thick, external  
surface, blackish-grey, hard, rough due to deep furrows and fissures, exfoliating in  
irregular scales exposing inner brownish-red fibrous zones; no taste or odour 
b)  Microscopic:
Stem bark shows a thick portion of rhytidoma, made up of about 25 - 30 alternate  
bands of cork and dead cells of secondary cortex and secondary phloem, cork consists of  
thin-walled, rectangular, about 5-6 layered, crushed, parenchymatous cells, mostly filled  
with  dark  brown  pigment;  secondary  cortex  consists  of  round,  oval  and  crushed  
rectangular cells; groups of stone cells, fibres and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate  
scattered throughout rhytidorna; secondary phloem consists of sieve elements, phloem  
fibres, crystal fibres, phloem parenchyma, a few stone cells and phloem rays; phloem  
fibres  arranged  in  alternate  bands  with  phloem  parenchyma,  phloem  parenchyma  
consists of rectangular, thin-walled cells, a few contain prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate; crystal fibres present, divided into numerous chambers, each containing single  
prismatic crystal of calcium oxalate; phloem rays uniseriate to biseriate, upto 10 cells  
 96 high,  consists  of  round,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells;  stone  cells,  mostly  
rectangular, occur associated In groups of 2-4 with bands of phloem fibres. 
Powder - Reddish-brown; shows fragments of cork cells, phloem fibres with wide lumen  
and  pointed  tips,  crystal  fibres,  phloem  rays,  rectangular  stone  cells  and  prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than13Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than15Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol  
(95 : 5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) a fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.84 (light blue). On  
exposure to Iodine vapour two spots appear at Rf. 0.80 and 0.84 (both yellow). On  
spraying with Dragendorff reagent followed by 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid a spot  
appears at Rf. 0.84 (orange). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannins and Alkaloids.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Stambhana, Vra¸a¿odhana, Visphota¿aman¢ 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Nyagrodh¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a
THERAPEUTIC USES - Tvaka, Rakt¡tis¡ra, Vra¸a
DOSE - 3-5 g. (Powder).
             10-2- g. (Decoction).
 97 46. Koshataki (W.P) 
KOâËTAKÌ  (Whole Plant)
KoÀ¡tak¢ consists of dried whole plant of Luffa acutangula (Linn.) Roxb. (Fam. 
Cucurbitaceae); a large monoecious, annual climber, found wild and also cultivated  
throughout the greater part of India. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:K¤tavedhan¡ , J¡l¢, Dh¡m¡rg
Assam.:--
Beng.:Zinga
Eng.:Ribbed Gourd
Guj.:Turiya, Kadawa, Turiya
Hindi.:Turai, Satputia
Kan.:Hire-Valli
Kash.:--
Mal.:Peerkam Kai
Mar.:Dodka Turiya
Ori.:Tarada
Punj.:Turiya
Tam.:Peerkku
Tel.:Beera, Chedu beeha, Varri beera
Urdu.:Turai
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root - Occurs in cut pieces, 8-12 cm long, and 0.5-0.7 cm thick, yellowish-brown;  
almost cylindrical, rough due to longitudinal wrinkles, having a few adventitious roots;  
fracture, short 
Stem - 0.2-0.4 cm thick, 5 angled, glabrous, scabrid, having tendrils; brownish-yellow. 
Leaf - petiole 3-8 cm long; somewhat twisted, wrinkled, scabrid, angular; brownish-
yellow; lamina crimpled, curled, corrugated, pale or light-green, 6-9 cm long and broad;  
palmately 5-7 angled or sub lobate, scabrid on both surfaces, base cordate, nerves and  
veins prominent beneath
Flower - Male flower in small racemes or single, calyx pubescent, 1.3 cm long, lobes  
lanceolate, light greenish-yellow; corolla yellow, 2 cm long, spreading, obovate; stamens  
3; Female flower solitary, yellow; pedicel 5-10 cm long; ovary strongly ribbed; stigma,  
trifid. 
Fruit - A pepo; 9-12 cm long, and 2-4 cm broad; cylindrical or club-shaped, obovate in  
 98 shape, tapering towards the base; pale yellowish-brown; outer surface covered with 8-10  
prominent  longitudinal  ribs;  three  chambers,  inner  part  being  fibrous  and  easily  
detachable as a whole from the outer part. 
Seed - Ovoid-oblong, 0.6-0.8 cm long, and 0.5-0.6 cm wide; much compressed, slightly  
corrugated on the edges, black; taste, bitter.
b)  Microscopic:
Root - Shows wavy outline composed of cork cells, a few outermost layers of secondary  
cortex disintegrated, remaining outer cortical cells lignified, and a number of large,  
thinwalled, lignified, variously shaped stone cells with very wide lumen found; inner  
cortical cells thin-walled and parenchymatous; secondary phloem consisting of thin-
walled cells of usual elements; secondary xylem tissues lignified traversed by multi  
seriate, radially elongated, thin-walled ray cells; xylem vessel simple pitted; a few  
simple, round to oval starch grains measuring 4-7 µ in dia., having striations and distinct  
hilum found in sec ondary cortex. 
Stem - Shows 5 prominent ridges; epidermis single layered, covered by cuticle; cortex  
composed of 6 -10 or more layered, oval to polygonal, collenchyma cells under ridges,  
followed  by  4-6  layered,  compact  band  of  thick-walled,  polygonal,  lignified  cells;  
ground tissues composed of round to oval, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, embedded  
with 10 bicollateral, open, conjoint, endarch vascular bundles, 5 of outer ring present  
opposite the ridges while rest 5 of the inner ring face the furrows; secondary phloem and  
xylem consisting of usual elements; xylem vessel bordered pitted; a few simple starch  
grains, round to oval, having striations with distinct hilum, measuring 5-8  µ in dia., 
found scattered in cortical and pith region. 
Leaf -
Petiole - shows 6-7 prominent ridges having sJingle layered epidermis, covered by thick  
cuticle; secondary cortex -wide in each ridge, composed of thin-walled, parenchymatous  
cells; ground tissue a wide zone having 6 or 7 bicollateral, vascular bundles present in  
each ridge.
Lamina  - shows single layered epidermis on both surfaces, having simple unicellular  
hairs with blunt tips and glandular hairs with unicellular stalk of variable length and  
spherical head having 3 or 4 cells; mesophyll differentiated into palisade and spongy  
parenchyma;  vascular  bundles  bicollateral;  stomata,  anomocytic,  present  on  both  
surfaces; stomatal number 59 - 64 on lower  surface and 29 -39 on  upper  surface;  
stomatal index 13-14 on lower surface and 9-10 on upper surface; palisade ratio not over  
3; vein islets number. 14-19 per sq. mm. 
Fruit - Section shows irregular outline due to 8-10 prominent ribs; epicarp consist of  
single layered papillose epidermis covered with thick, striated cuticle having a few  
bristles, followed by 4-6 layers of thin-walled, tangentially elongated parenchymatous  
 99 cells, some cells especially near the ribs, having brownish contents; below this thick-
walled, polyhedral, continuous band of stone cells present, measuring 24-40 µ in dia.; 
outer 6-8 layers of this band consists of closely packed thick-walled sclereids, while the  
inner 2-4 layers, thick-walled and distinctly pitted; rnesocarp broad, composed of a zone  
of rounded to tangentially elongated, parenchymatous cells having bicollateral vascular  
bundles, followed by 8-10 layers of thick-walled, polyhedral, sclerenchyma and fibres. 
Seed  - Testa consists of a single layer of rectangular, thick-walled, sclerenchymatous  
cells,  followed  by  a  tegmen,  composed  of  5  or  6  layered,  oval  to  polygonal,  
parenchymatous cells and a single layered elongated, lignified, sclerotic palisade-like  
cells;  endosperm  composed  of  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells;  cotyledons  flat,  
consisting of thin-walled, oval to polygonal, parenchymatous cells. 
Powder - Greyish-brown; shows fragments of cork cells, thick-walled, wavy or sinuous  
epidermal cells, lignified sclerotic or palisade-like cells of testa, sclerenchymatous cells,  
pieces of unicellular and glandular hairs, vessel with spiral and reticulate thickening,  
simple or groups of elongated, lignified stone cells, simple, rounded to oval starch grains  
having concentric striations and narrow hilum, measuring 4-7 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than16Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 13Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol  
(8:2) shows under UV (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.34, 0.74, 0.80 and 0.91  
(all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots appear- at Rf. 0.13, 0.17, 0.34, 0.51,  
0.65, 0.74, 0.78 and 0.96 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid  
reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes three spots appear at Rf. 0.34,  
0.78 and 0.96 (all grey). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Bitter Principles, Saponins, Sapogenins and Fixed Oil. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, Alpa KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphapittaghna, Malavi¿odhan¢, Vamanopaga, TridoÀahara 
 
 100 IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Abhay¡ Lava¸a
THERAPEUTIC USES - KuÀ¶ha, P¡¸·u, Pl¢h¡roga, áopha, Gulma, Ëdhm¡na,  
GaraviÀa, Ar¿a, K¡mal¡, Ga¸·am¡l¡
DOSE - 5 - 10 g.
 101 47. Kumuda (Fl.) 
KUMUDË (Flower)
Kumud¡  consists  of  dried  flowers  of  Nymphaea  alba  Linn.  (Fam. 
Nymphaeaceae); a perennial aquatic herb, very common in ponds, streams and fresh  
water lakes and upto 1800 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Kumudam, Sitolpalam, áa¿ik¡nt¡, áy¡mav¤nt¡
Assam.:--
Beng.:Kumuda, Shandh Shaluka
Eng.:Indian Blue Water Lily
Guj.:Piyanu
Hindi.:Kui, Kanval, Kokka
Kan.:Bilenaydile, Biletavare
Kash.:--
Mal.:Ampal
Mar.:Kamod
Ori.:--
Punj.:--
Tam.:Nalla Kalav, Vellampal, Allittamarai
Tel.:Allikada, Tellakaluva
Urdu.:Kamal
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Flower white, solitary, 10-13 cm across; sepals 4, outside greenish to brownish,  
inside whitish; petals about 10, white; stamens many, outer ones being transformed  
successively from petals; anthers linear small without appendages; pistil syncarpous,  
carpels 10-16, sunk in fleshy disk, ovary multicellular and crowned by a large stigma  
with 16 rays, each with a cylindrical appendages, ovules many, fruit a berry. 
Powder - Light-brown; shows polygonal, thin-walled epidermal cells in surface view,  
stellate hairs and spherical or trigonal pollen grains, measuring 11-24 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than18Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than9Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 20Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
 102 T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol  
(85 : 15) shows under U.V. (366 nm )  three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.66 (red), 0.77  
(blue) and 0.88 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.66, 0.92  
and 0.96 (all brown). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids and Glycosides.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Picchila, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya, H¤dya, Pittahara, Stambhana, V¡tahara, Garbha Sth¡pana,  
Sramahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Triphal¡di Taila, Bala A¿vagandh¡ L¡kÀ¡di Taila
THERAPEUTIC USES - RaktadoÀa, D¡ha, H¤droga, Raktapitta
DOSE - 3-6 g.
 103 48. Kusha (Rt. Stock) 
KUáA  (Root Stock)
Ku¿a  consists  of  dried  root  stock  of  Desmostachya  bipinnata  Stapf.  (Fam. 
Poaceae); a tall, tufted, perennial grass, 30-150 cm high, found throughout the country in  
hot and dry places. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Yagyabh£Àa¸a, S£cyagra
Assam.:Kush
Beng.:Kush
Eng.:Saved Gram
Guj.:Dabb
Hindi.:Kush
Kan.:Darbha Hullu
Kash.:--
Mal.:Darbha, Darbhapullu
Mar.:Darbha
Ori.:Kusha
Punj.:Kush, Dale
Tam.:Darbaipul
Tel.:Darbhagaddi
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug occurs in 6-20 cm long, 0.3-0.5 cm thick cut pieces, almost cylindrical;  
internodes smooth, stout, mostly covered with shining sheath, having distinct nodes;  
brownish-yellow; a few thin, fibrous, ash coloured roots arise at nodes; fracture, short.
b)  Microscopic:
Root  stock  shows  single  layered  epidermis,  covered  with  striated  cuticle;  
hypodermis composed of 3-5 layered, circular to polygonal, sclerenchymatous cells;  
cortex consisting of 5-9 layered, circular parenchymatous cells with small intercellular  
spaces; a few collateral vascular bundles found scattered in this zone, followed by 5-8  
layered, discontinuous sclerenchymatous ring; ground tissue composed of continuous  
mass of slightly thick-walled, non-lignified, parenchymatous cells; numerous, collateral,  
vascular bundles found scattered in this zone and each covered by sclerenchymatous  
sheath; xylem vessels simple pitted; starch grains simple round to oval, with centric  
hilum, measuring 8-14 µ in dia., and compound having two components, found scattered  
in hypodermis, cortex and ground tissues. 
 104 Powder - Yellowish-brown; shows fragments of circular to polygonal sclerenchymatous  
cells with distinct lumen and striations; long, pointed fibres; simple pitted xylem vessels;  
starch grains simple round to oval with centric hilum measuring 8-14  µ.  in dia. and 
compound having two components.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than9Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4: 1 :5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) seven fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.06,  
0.15, 0.24, 0.36, 0.64, 0.83 and 0.94 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour twelve  
spots appear at Rf. 0.06, 0.15, 0.24, 0.36, 0.47, 0.55, 0.64, 0.70, 0.76, 0.83, 0.90 and  
0.94 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating  
the plate for about ten minutes at 105 °C eight spots appear at Rf. 0.15, 0.24, 0.36, 0.64,  
0.76, 0.83, 0.90 and 0.94 (all grey). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Terpenes.  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :M£trala, Kaphapittahara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Karp£r¡dyarka, Sukum¡ra Gh¤ta, A¿mar¢hara  
KaÀ¡ya C£r¸a, T¤¸apancam£la Kv¡tha C£r¸a,  
Mutravirecan¢ya KaÀ¡ya C£r¸a, Stanyajanana  
KaÀ¡ya C£r¸a
THERAPEUTIC USES - M£trak¤cchra, Visarpa, D¡ha, A¿mar¢, T¤Àn¡, Bastiroga,  
Pradararoga, Raktapitta
DOSE - 50-100 g. of powder for decoction.
 105 49. Langali (Tub. Rt) 
LË×GALÌ  (Tuberous Root)
L¡´gal¢  consists  of  dried  tuberous  root  of  Gloriosa  superba  Linn.  (Fam. 
Liliaceae) a climber with leaf tendril and large, solitary or corymbose, showy flowers  
with perianth segments having wavy margins, greenish at first, later becoming yellow  
and finally scarlet or crimson coloured, and found wild throughout the tropical regions  
upto 2,000 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Kalih¡r¢, Garbhanut, Halin¢, Agni¿ikh¡
Assam.:--
Beng.:Bisalanguli
Eng.:Glory Lily
Guj.:Khadiyanag
Hindi.:Kalihari
Kan.:Kolikutumana Gade
Kash.:--
Mal.:Mathonni
Mar.:Karianag
Ori.:--
Punj.:Kariyari
Tam.:Kalappoi Kizhangu 
Tel.:Potthidumpa
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Tuberous roots thick, almost cylindrical or slightly laterally flattened, occurring  
in pieces of 15-30 cm long and 2.5 - 3.8 cm thick, often bifurcated with tapering ends,  
resembling a plough-share, one arm generally more than double the length of the other;  
brownish externally and yellowish internally; fracture, short; taste, acrid and bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Tuberous root shows single layered epidermis, externally cuticularised, consisting  
of rectangular cells, followed by ground parenchyma, with scattered small vascular  
bundles; parenchyma cells large, thin-walled, polygonal to circular, having conspicuous  
intercellular spaces, most of the cells specially of the outer layers filled with starch  
grains, simple, round to oblong, or polyhedral, measuring 8-33 µ in dia., showing clear  
hilum and concentric striations, occasionally compound with 2-3 components, measuring  
24-36  µ in dia.; vascular  bundles  collateral, numerous, scattered throughout  ground  
tissue,  consisting  of  xylem  and  phloem;  each  vascular  bundle  enclosed  by  
sclerenchymatous sheath, xylem composed of vessels, tracheids and parenchyma; vessels  
 106 having mostly reticulate thickening, smaller ones having spiral thickening, tracheids  
with  reticulate  thickening;  xylem  parenchyma  cells  usually  rectangular;  phloem  
consisting of sieve tubes, companion cells and phloem parenchyma; phloem parenchyma  
cells very small and thin-walled. 
Powder - Brown; shows fragments of parenchyma cells, simple starch grains, round to  
oblong  or  polyhedral  measuring  8-33  µ dia.  showing  clear  hilum  and  concentric  
striations, occasionally  compound  with 2-3 components,  measuring  24-36  µ in dia., 
sclerenchymatous cells, a few xylem vessels and tracheids. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 15Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Chloroform  :  
Methanol (9 : 1) shows under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.24 (blue),  
0.88 and 0.94 (both black). On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots appear at Rf. 0.09,  
0.16, 0.24, 0.38, 0.59, 0.75, 0.88 and 0.94 (all yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff  
reagent followed by 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid two spots appear at Rf. 0.88 and 0.94  
(both orange). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids and Resins.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Sara, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¡tahara, Garbhap¡tana 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - Nirgu¸d¢ Taila, K¡sis¡d¢ Taila, Mah¡viÀagarbha  
Taila
THERAPEUTIC USES - KuÀ¶ha, áopha, Ar¿a, Vra¸a, á£la, K¤mi, Basti¿£la, Garbha,  
áalya, V¡tavy¡dhi
DOSE - 125-250 mg. of purified drug. 
 107 50. Lashuna (Bulb) 
LAáUNA (Bulb)
La¿una consists of bulb of  Allium sativum  Linn. (Fam. Liliaceae); a perennial  
bulbous plant, cultivated as an important condiment crop in the country.
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Rasona, YavaneÀ¶a
Assam.:Maharu
Beng.:Lasuna
Eng.:Garlic
Guj.:Lasan, Lassun
Hindi.:Lahasun
Kan.:Bulluci
Kash.:--
Mal.:Vellulli, Nelluthulli
Mar.:Lasun
Ori.:--
Punj.:Lasan
Tam.:Vellaipoondu
Tel.:Vellulli, Tellapya, Tellagadda
Urdu.:Lahsan, Seer
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug occurs as entire bulb or isolated cloves (bulblets); bulb sub-globular, 4-6  
cm  in  diameter,  consisting  of  8-20  cloves,  surrounded  by  3-5  whitish  papery  
membranous scales attached to a short, disc-like woody stem having numerous, wiry  
rootlets on the under side; each clove is irregularly ovoid, tapering at upper end with  
dorsal convex surface, 2-3 cm long, 0.5 - 0.8 cm wide, each surrounded by two very thin  
papery whitish and brittle scales having 2-3 yellowishgreen folded leaves contained  
within two white fleshy, modified leaf bases or scales; odour, peculiarly pungent and  
disagreeable; taste, acrid gives warmth to the tongue. 
b)  Microscopic:
A  clove  of  bulb  shows  tri  to  tetrangular  appearance  in  outline;  outer  scale  
consists of an outer epidermis, followed by hypodermal crystal layer, mesophyll made of  
parenchyma cells and an inner epidermis; both outer and inner epidermis consists of sub  
rectangular cells; hypodermis consists of compressed, irregular, tangentially elongated  
cells, each cell having large prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, while many cells  
contain small prismatic crystals also, mesophyll  several layers of parenchymatous cells  
having a few vascular tissues with spiral vessels; inner epidermis similar to outer one;  
inner scale similar to outer scale but outer epidermis composed of sclerenchymatous  
cells; prismatic crystals in hypodermis slightly smaller. 
In surface view cells of outer epidermis elongated, narrow with thin porous wall  
while those of inner epidermis similar to outer one but non-porous; cells of hypodermal  
 108 crystals  layer  ellipsoidal  with  thick  porous  walls,  each  cell  having  large  prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate, many cells also contain small prismatic crystals in addition  
to  bigger  ones;  inner  scale  shows  markedly  sclerenchymatous  cells  with  greatly  
thickened walls and very narrow lumen; cells of hypodermal crystal layer somewhat  
smaller with walls more frequently pitted, size of crystals also smaller. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 2.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Loss on drying Not less than 60Per cent, Appendix 2.2.9
Volatile Oil Not less than0.1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.10
T.L.C. -
T.L.C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  n-Butanol  :  
Isopropanol Acetic acid: Water (3 : 1: 1 : 1) shows under UV (366 nm) two fluorescent  
zones at Rf. 0.58 and 0.72 (both light blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour nine spots  
appear at Rf. 0.18, 0.26, 0.34, 0.38, 0.46, 0.58, 0.72, 0.77 and 0.93 (all yellow): On  
spraying with Ninhydrin reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C seven 
spots appear at Rf. 0.26, 0.38, 0.46, 0.58, 0.67, 0.72 and 0.93 (all pink). On spraying  
with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C 
seven spots appear at Rf. 0.26, 0.38, 0.46, 0,58, 0.67, 0.72 and 0.93 (all gery). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Volatile Oil containing Allyl Disulphide and Diallyl Disulphide. It  
also contains Allin, Allicin, Mucilage and Albumin. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u 
Guna :Guru, Picchila, Sara, Snigdha, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Balya,  CakÀuÀya,  D¢pana,  H¤dya,  Kaphahara,  Medhya,  
RaktadoÀahara,  V¡tahara,  V¤Àya,  Var¸ya,  PittaduÀanakara,  
Bhagnasandh¡nakara,  Ras¡yana,  Jantughna,  Ka¸¶hya,  Asthi  
M¡Æsa Sandh¡nkar 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - La¿un¡di Va¶¢, La¿un¡di Gh¤ta And Vac¡  
La¿un¡di Taila
THERAPEUTIC USES - J¢r¸a, Jvara, K¤miroga, Gulma, KuÀ¶ha, Ar¿a, K¡sa, Sv¡sa,  
Pinasa, S£la, Kar¸a¿£la V¡tavy¡di, Hikka, Medoroga,  Yoni  
Vy¡pata, Visucik¡, Pl¢h¡ V¤ddhi, KÀaya, ViÀama Jvara,  
Apasm¡ra Unm¡da, Sasa, áopha, H¤droga, V¡t¿£la, Trika¿
£la, Vra¸a K¤mi 
DOSE - 3 - g. of the drug. 
 109 51. Mahabala (Rt.) 
MAHËBALË (Root)
Mah¡bal¡ consists of dried roots of Sida rhombifolia Linn. (Fam. Malvaceae), an  
erect annual or perennial undershrub, 1.5 m high, distributed throughout the country  
especially in moist regions, ascending to an altitude of 1800 m in the Himalayas.
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Atibal¡, PitapuÀpi
Assam.:--
Beng.:Pitabedala, Kheriti
Eng.:Country Mallow
Guj.:Mahabala
Hindi.:Pitabala, Pitabariyar
Kan.:Kisangihettutti-gida
Kash.:--
Mal.:Anakkuruntotti
Mar.:Mahbala
Ori.:--
Punj.:Khurunti
Tam.:Kurunthotti
Tel.:Gubatada, Pedda Mutheera Pulagum
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug occurs as entire root or cut pieces of varying lengths, 7-8 mm in thickness,  
with wavy lateral roots comparatively thinner than main roots having numerous rootlets,  
brownish-yellow, surface, rough due to scars of small rootlets and lenticels; fracture,  
hard and splintery. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature  root  shows  cork  consisting  of  3-10  rows  of  narrow,  rectangular,  
tangentially  elongated,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells,  a  few  containing  rosette  
crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  secondary  phloem  composed  of  phloem  fibres  in  
wedgeshaped patches with thin-walled parenchyma in between; phloem rays thin-walled,  
tangentially  elongated  towards  secondary  cortex;  a  few  rosette  crystals  of  calcium  
oxalate found scattered in phloem parenchyma; secondary xylem composed of vessels,  
fibre, parenchyma and rays; vessels arranged in radial rows, fibres moderately long,  
thick-walled, lignified with wide lumen and pointed apex; xylem rays 2-3 cells wide, a  
few containing rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; in Bala (S. cordifolia Linn.) 1-3 cells 
wide with rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; 1 or 2 cells wide with rhomboidal crystals  
of calcium oxalate in Atibala  (Abutilon indicum  Sw.), and rosette crystals of calcium  
 110 oxalate  present  in  secondary  cortex  and  absent  in  xylem  rays  in  Nagabala  (S. 
veronicaefolia Lam.). 
Powder - Creamish-grey; shows moderately large, thick-walled, lignified fibres, with  
wide lumen and pointed tips, fragments of cork cells simple, pitted vessels and a few  
rosette crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Chloroform  :  
Methanol (8 : 2) shows under U.V. (366 nm) five fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.08 (blue),  
0.35 (blue), 0.46 (blue), 0.78 (blue) and 0.95 (pink). On exposure to Iodine vapour eight  
spots appear at Rf. 0.08, 0.15, 0.39, 0.50, 0.66, 0.81, 0.89 and 0.99 (all yellow). On  
spraying with Dragendorff reagent followed by 5% Methanolic-Sulphurc acid reagent  
two spots appear at Rf. 0.04 and 0.74 (both orange). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids (Vasicinone and Vasicine).
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Picchila, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Gr¡h¢,  Pittaghna,  V¡taghna,  áukrav¤ddhikara,  Ojovardhaka,  
K¡ntivardhaka, Balya. 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Mah¡viÀagarbha Taila, Navratna R¡jam¤g¡´ka Rasa
THERAPEUTIC USES - áukrakÀaya, KÀata, KÀaya, ViÀamajvara, Daurbalya,  
V¡tavy¡dhi, V¡tarakta, Raktapitta, áopha
DOSE - 3-6 g of the drug in powder form.
 111 52. Manjishta (St.) 
MAØJIâÙHË (Stem)
MaµjiÀ¶h¡ consists of dried stem of Rubia cordifolia Linn. (Fam. Rubiaceae); a  
perennial herbaceous prickly creeper or climber upto 10m long, found throughout the  
country ascending to 3750 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Yojnav¡ll¢, Vastrarajin¢, Rakta
Assam.:Phuvva
Beng.:Manjistha, Manjith
Eng.:Indian Maddar
Guj.:Manjitha
Hindi.:Manjitha, Manjit
Kan.:Manjustha
Kash.:--
Mal.:Manjatti
Mar.:Manjihtha
Ori.:--
Punj.:Manjistha, Manjit
Tam:Manjitte
Tel.:Manjishtha
Urdu.:Majeeth
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Stem slender, more or less cylindrical, slightly flattened, wiry, about 0.5 cm  
thick, brown to purple coloured; surface scabrous, stiff and grooved with longitudinal  
cracks; prickles present in the immature stem; nodes distinct having two leaf scars, one  
on either side; fracture, short.
b)  Microscopic:
Mature stem shows exfoliating cork, ruptured at places, forming dome-shaped  
structure, consisting of 3-12 or more layered radially arranged, squarish and tangentially  
elongated, thin-walled cells, appearing polygonal in surface view; secondary cortex 3-5  
layered consisting of tangentially elongated, thin-walled cells, some of which contain  
acicular crystals of calcium oxalate as isolated or in bundles; a few cells contain sandy  
crystals as black granular masses; secondary phloem, a wide zone of reddish colour,  
composed of sieve elements and phloem parenchyma, fibres absent; phloem parenchyma  
smaller towards inner side gradually becoming larger and tangentially elongated towards  
periphery, a few cells contain sandy crystals of calcium oxalate; secondary xylem forms  
a continuous  cylinder  of reddish  colour, composed  of vessels, tracheids, fibres and  
xylem parenchyma; vessels numerous, distributed uniformly throughout xylem, larger  
 112 towards outer side and smaller towards centre; in macerated preparation, vessels show  
great variation in shape and size having lignified walls and pitted thickening; xylem  
fibres thick-walled, long and short, longer ones have narrow lumen while shorter ones  
have wide lumen with pitted thickenings; xylem parenchyma also vary in shape and size  
having pitted or reticulate thickening; centre occupied by narrow pith consisting of thin -
walled, parenchymatous cells, a few cells contain sandy crystals of calcium oxalate. 
Powder - Pink; shows numerous fragments of cork, lignified xylem vessels, tracheids,  
and fibres with pitted and reticulate xylem parenchyma having red coloured contents;  
acicular and sandy crystals as black granular masses. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than12Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 17Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. - 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid : Water (4: 1 :5) shows in visible light two spots at Rf. 0.92 (grey) and 0.98 (green).  
Under UV (366 nm) two fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.92 (grey) and 0.98 (pink).  
On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf. 0.28, 0.37, 0.53, 0.72, 0.92 and  
0.98 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating  
the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C six spots appear at Rf. 0.28, 0.37 (both grey), 0.53  
(bluish grey), 0.72 (grey), 0.92 (grey) and 0.98 (violet
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycosides
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :K¤mighna,  Kaphapitta¿¡maka,  Svarya,  V¤Àya,  Var¸ya,  ViÀa,  
Sothaghna,  KuÀ¶haghna,  Pramehaghna,  Stambhan,  Artavajanana,  
Ras¡nyana, áo¸itasth¡pana 
 
 113 IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Arvind¡sava, A¿vagandh¡riÀ¶a, U¿ir¡sava,  
Candan¡sava, B¤hanmanjiÀ¶h¡di Kv¡tha,  
ManjiÀ¶h¡di Taila, Khadir¡di Gu¶ik¡ (Mukha)
THERAPEUTIC USES - Yoni Roga, AkÀi Roga. áleÀmaja áotha, Karpa Roga,  
ManjiÀ¶h¡ Meha, Rakt¡tisara, KuÀ¶ha, Visarpa, Prameha,  
SarpaviÀa, Bhagna, Ar¿a, Vyanga
DOSE - 2-4 g. of the drug.
 114 53. Maricha (Frt.) 
MARICA (Fruit)
Marica  consists  of  fully  mature  dried  fruit  of  Piper  nigrum  Linn.  (Fam. 
Piperaceae); a climber, cultivated from Konkan Southwards, especially in North Konkan  
Kerala, and also in Assam; fruits ripen from December to March, depending  upon  
climatic conditions; fruits harvested from December to April. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Vellaja, K¤À¸a, UÀa¸a
Assam.:--
Beng.:Golmorich, Kalamorich, Morich
Eng.:Black Pepper
Guj.:Kalimori
Hindi.:Kalimirch
Kan.:Karimonaru, Menaru
Kash.:--
Mal.:Kurumulaku
Mar.:Kalamiri
Ori.:--
Punj.:Galmirich, Kalimirch
Tam.:Milagu
Tel.:Miriyalu, Marichamu
Urdu.:Filfil Siyah, Kalimirich
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Fruits greyish-black to black, hard, wrinkled, 0.4-0.5 cm in dia.; odour, aromatic;  
taste, pungent. 
b)  Microscopic:
Fruit consists of a thick pericarp for about one third of fruit and an inner mass of  
perisperm,  enclosing  a  small  embryo;  pericarp  consists  of  epicarp,  mesocarp  and  
endocarp; epicarp composed of single layered, slightly sinuous, tabular cells forming  
epidermis, below which, are present 1 or 2 layers of radially elongated, lignified stone  
cells adjacent to group of cells of parenchyma; mesocarp wide, composed of band of  
tangentially  elongated  parenchymatous  cells  having  a  few  isolated,  tangentially  
elongated oil cells present in outer region and a few fibro-vascular bundles, a single row  
of oil cells in the inner region of mesocarp; endocarp composed of a row of beaker -
shaped stone cells; testa single layered, yellow coloured, thick-walled sclerenchymatous  
cells; perisperm contains parenchymatous cells having a few oil globules and packed  
with abundant, oval to round, simple and compound starch grains measuring 5.5-11.0 µ 
in dia.; having 2-3 components and a few minute aleurone grains. 
 115 Powder  - Blackish-grey; shows debris with a characteristic, in groups, more or less  
isodiametric or slightly elongated stone cells, interspersed with thin-walled, polygonal  
hypodermal cells; beaker-shaped stone cells from endocarp and abundant polyhedral,  
elongated cells from peri sperm, packed tightly with masses of minute compound and  
single, oval to round, starch grains measuring 5.5-11.0 µ in dia.; having 2-3 component  
and a few aleurone grains and oil globules.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(7 : 3) shows in visible light four spots at Rf. 0.05, 0.08 (both light green), 0.27 (light  
yellow) and 0.52 (yellow). Under UV (366 nm) ten fluorescent zones are visible at Rf.  
0.05, 0.08 (both light brown), 0.20 (light blue), 0.46 (blue), 0.52 (greenish yellow), 0.57  
(bluish yellow), 0.66 (light blue), 0.74 (light pink), 0.82 and 0.97 (both blue). On  
exposure to Iodine vapour eleven spots appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.08, 0.14, 0.20, 0.27, 0.34,  
0.46, 0.57, 0.66, 0.74 and 0.97 (all yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent  
followed by 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent nine spots appear at Rf. 0.05 (light-
orange), 0.14, 0.20, 0.27 (all orange), 0.46, 0.57 (both yellowish orange), 0.66, 0.74  
(both orange) and 0.97 (light orange). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent  
and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110°C twelve spots appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.08, 0.20,  
0.27, 0.46, 0.52, 0.57, 0.66, 0.74, 0.82, 0.90.and 0.97 (all violet). 
T.L.C. OF PIPERINE -
Preparation of the Extract: 
Extract 1 g of Pepper powder by heating under reflux for 15 minutes with 10 ml  
methanol. Filter, evaporate the filtrate so as to reduce it to 2 ml and use for TLC  
application. 
Standard Piperine:
Dilute 5 gm in 5 ml methanol 
Adsorbent: Silica gel plate
Solvent System: Toluene: Ethyl acetate (7:3) (saturate the chamber for at least 30  
minutes)
 116 Application: Pepper extract : 20 µ    }
}--band form.
Piperine : 10 µ   }
Running distance: 10 to 12 cms 
Drying: Air rying for 15 to 20 min. and then in an oven for 5 min. 
Detection: Cool and spray the plate thoroughly with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and  
heat at 1100 C for 5-10 min. under observation. When piperine spots appear lemon  
yellow, the plate is to be taken out. Over-heating turns yellow spots to violet. 
Rf. of Piperine: Approximately 0.5 in case of hand made plates 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids (Piperine, Chavicine, Piperidine, Piperetine) and  
Essential Oil. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :áleÀmahara,  D¢pana,  Medohara,  Pittakara,  R£cya,  Kaphav¡t¡jit  
V¡tahara, Chedana, Jantun¡¿ana, Chedi, H¤droga, V¡taroga. 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Maric¡di Gu¶ik¡, Maric¡di Taila, Trika¶u C£r¸a
THERAPEUTIC USES - áv¡sa, á£la, K¤miroga, Tvagroga
DOSE - 250 mg - 1 g. of the drug in powder form.
 117 53. Mashaparni (W.P.) 
MËâAPARÛÌ  (Whole Plant)
M¡Àapar¸¢ consists of dried whole plant of  Teramnus labialis  Spreng. (Fam. 
Fabaceae), a very  variable  climbing  or  spreading  hairy  herb,  found  throughout  the  
country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Mah¡sah¡, S£ryasani, K¡mboj, Pa¸·utoma¿a Pas¸¢
Assam.:--
Beng.:Mashance, Bankalaai, Mashani
Eng.:Vogel-Tephrosis
Guj.:Banudad, Janglee, Adad
Hindi.:Mashvan, Banvdad, Mashoni
Kan.:Kadu Uddu
Kash.:--
Mal.:Katu Ulandu
Mar.:Ran Udid
Ori.:--
Punj.:Jangali Urad
Tam.:Kattu-Ulandu
Tel.:Karuminum, Mashperni
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root - Tap root with lateral roots occurs in cylindrical, branched pieces, 3-5 cm long,  
and upto 1cm in dia., light brown to dark brown, with longitudinal and transverse cracks;  
lateral roots thin, smooth, moderately woody; fracture, laminated and short. 
Stem - Cut pieces 5-8 cm long, upto 0.8 cm in dia, somewhat twisted and branched, or  
cylindrical, slender, rough due to cracks and longitudinal ridges and furrows, brownish -
grey; fracture, short and fibrous. 
Leaf -  Trifoliate,  leaflet  ovate-oblong,  6-12  cm  long,  base  round  or  acute,  light  
brownish-yellow. 
Flower - Lax axillary racemes, 5-15 cm long, flowers red, pink, purple or white, slender,  
more or less hairy rachis. 
Fruit - Pod upto 5 cm long, straight or sometimes slightly recurved, brownish-black to  
dark brown, having 6-8 or 12 seeds. 
Seed - Oblong, cylindrical, slightly rounded at the ends; 2-3 mm long upto 2 mm in dia.;  
dark brown. 
 118 b)  Microscopic:
Root - Poorly developed cork, 4-10 layered, consisting of tangentially elongated cells  
with  brown  walls,  exfoliating  strips  of  crushed  cork  cells  occasionally  present;  
secondary cortex consisting of 3-8 rows of tangentially elongated, thin-walled cells;  
secondary phloem appearing dome-shaped, composed of sieve tubes, companion cells,  
parenchyma, fibres, and crystal fibres, the whole being traversed by phloem rays that  
funnel out beyond phloem; phloem parenchyma thin-walled, polygonal; phloem fibres  
numerous,  lignified,  thick-walled,  septate,  occur  mostly  in  groups,  among  phloem  
parenchyma; crystal fibres present containing a prismatic crystal of calcium oxalate;  
cambium not distinct; secondary xylem consisting of vessels, fibres and crystal fibres all  
traversed by xylem rays; vessels solitary or in groups of 2-3 with pitted thickenings;  
tracheids present, fibres septate with thick-walls and pointed; xylem parenchyma non-
lignified, thick-walled elongated cells; crystal fibres, elongated, thick-walled, divided  
by transverse partitions into chambers, each chamber containing a prismatic crystal of  
calcium oxalate; xylem rays, 1 to 6 cells wide, thin-walled radially elongated; prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate, and starch grains present in secondary cortex, phloem fibres,  
phloem parenchyma and medullary rays; starch grains, numerous, mostly simple, rarely  
compound, oval to rounded with central hilum measuring 3-14 µ in dia. 
Stem  - Shows 6-11 layers, thin-walled, rectangular, exfoliated cork cells; secondary  
cortex  consisting  of  thin-walled,  oval  to  rectangular,  parenchymatous  cells  having  
numerous groups of cortical fibres, arranged in radial rows; pericycle composed of  
isolated strands of fibres, occasionally with stone cells between them; secondary phloem  
composed of usual elements along with secretory cells; secondary xylem composed of  
usual elements; xylem fibres long, lignified; vessels simple pitted; ray 1 or 2 cells wide,  
pith  composed  of  oval  to  polygonal,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells  containing  
secretory cells. 
Leaf -
Midrib - single layered epidermis covered by thick cuticle, and having a few unicellular  
hairs on both surfaces; this is followed by 4 or 5 layered, thick-walled polygonal,  
collenchymatous  cells on both  lower  and upper  surfaces; 2 or  3 layers of oval to  
polygonal,  thin-walled  parenchymatous  cells  present  on  both  surfaces;  'U'  shaped  
vascular bundles having usual elements.
Lamina - single layered epidermis covered by thick striated cuticle and having a few  
unicellular hairs on both surfaces; single layered palisade cell; 1 or 2 layers of thin -
walled, polygonal parenchymatous cells containing chlorophyll on lower surface, a few  
small  vascular  bundles  having  usual  elements  scattered  in  central regions;  stomata  
paracytic on both surfaces; stomatal index 28-34 on lower surfaces and 18-24 on upper  
surfaces; palisade ratio not more than 5; vein-islet number 6-8; veinlet termination  
number not more than 4. 
Fruit - Single layered, thick-walled, radially elongated, epidermal cells, followed by one  
row of thick-walled, rounded to rectangular, stone cells of various sizes having narrow,  
lumen  and  centric  striations,  3  or  4  layers  of  thin-walled  radially  elongated,  
 119 parenchymatous cells and several layers of thick-walled, lignified sclerenchymatous  
cells of mesocarp.
Seed - Testa containing thick-walled, tangentially elongated, lignified, sclerenchymatous  
cells,  followed  by  2  layers  of  thin-walled,  palisade-like  cells,  palisade  internally  
supported by a single layered bearer cells; cotyledons consist of oval to polygonal, thin  
walled parenchymatous cells. 
Powder -  Light  yellowish-cream;  shows  fragments  of  cork,  parenchyma,  tracheids,  
unicellular hairs, thick-walled, elongated, polygonal cells of testa, simple pitted vessel,  
septate, thick-walled and pointed fibres; prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, simple,  
oval to rounded starch grains measuring 3 -14 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C.- 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9 : 1) shows under UV (366 nm) seven fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.05, 0.10, 0.15 (all  
blue), 0.26 (light blue), 0.49, 0.74 (both blue) and 0.85 (light blue). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour four spots appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.10, 0.33 and 0.69 (all yellow). On spraying  
with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 ° C four 
spots appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.10, 0.33 (all violet) and 0.96 (dark violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycosides.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya, Gr¡h¢, V¤Àya, V¡tapitta¿¡maka, Kaphavardhaka, áukrala 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Am¤tapr¡¿a Gh¤ta, A¿oka Gh¤ta, Vid¡ry¡di Gh¤ta,  
Dhanwantara Gh¤ta, N¡r¡yana Taila, B¤hat M¡Àa  
Taila, Bal¡ Taila, Mah¡n¡r¡ya¸a Taila
THERAPEUTIC USES - Atis¡ra, Prav¡hik¡, V¡tapitta Jvara, áukralp¡ta, Raktapitta,  
Raktavik¡ra, D¡ha, áotha, áirah¿£la
DOSE - 5-10 g. of the powder.
 120 55. Masura (Sd.)
MASÍRA (Seed)
Mas£ra consists of dried seed of Lens culinaris Medic. (Fam. Fabaceae), a small,  
erect, pubescent herb, 15-75 cm high, cultivated throughout north India, particularly in  
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal, and to a smaller extent in  
Punjab. Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Gujarat. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Supya, PittabheÀaja
Assam.:--
Beng.:Masuri
Eng.:Lentil
Guj.:Masura, Masoor, Masur
Hindi.:Masur
Kan.:Masura Bele
Kash.:--
Mal.:Chanam payar, Vattupparupu
Mar.:Masur, Massora
Ori.:--
Punj.:Masur, Masara
Tam.:Masoor Paruppu
Tel.:Masura Pappu, Masooralu
Urdu.:Masur
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Seed lens-shaped, smooth, about 4 mm thick, greyish-brown and faintly mottled,  
cotyledons pink; taste, characteristic. 
b)  Microscopic:
Seed testa consists of a single layer of epidermis composed of palisade-like cells,  
columnar and sclerenchymatous, with a tiny projection and shows a light, transparent  
line; below this, a single layer of hypodermis consisting of beaker or dumbbell shaped  
cells present; testa followed by cotyledons, consisting of a thin layer of upper and lower  
epidermis covered with a thin layer of cuticle; epidermis made up of rectangular cells  
oriented along their long axis; below epidermis, mesophyll consists  of thin-walled,  
rounded or oval shaped, parenchymatous cells, generally filled with simple, round to  
oval, starch grains many with striations showing a fissured hilum; mostly measuring  
between 30-40µ in dia. 
 121 Powder -  Cream coloured; shows black particles due to pieces of testa; fragments of  
thick-walled, elongated, oval to polygonal cells of testa and a few sclerenchymatous  
cells in surface view; irregular, wavy palisade-like cells, and simple, round to oval,  
starch grains upto 40 µ in dia., with striations and a fissured hilum. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: water (4:1:5) shows on exposure to Iodine vapour six spots at Rf. 0.11, 0.40, 0.44,  
0.50, 0.65 and 0.80 (all yellow). On spraying with Ninhydrin reagent and heating the  
plate for about ten minutes at 110 °C seven spots appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.18, 0.24, 0.33,  
0.44, 0.50 and 0.65 (all pink).
CONSTITUENTS  - Flavonoids and Vitamins. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya, Kaphapitta¿¡maka, Sangr¡h¢, Var¸ya, V¡tamayakara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - 
THERAPEUTIC USES - Atis¡ra, M£ttrak¤cchra, Jvara, Raktapitta
DOSE - 10-20 g.
 122 56. Mudga (Sd.) 
MUDGA (Seed)
Mudga consists of dried seeds of Phaseolus radiatus Linn. (Fam. Fabaceae); an  
erect or sub-erect, much branched, 0.5 -1.3 m tall, annual herb, extensively cultivated all  
over the country as a pulse crop. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Mungalya
Assam.:--
Beng.:Moong
Eng.:Green Gram
Guj.:Mug, Mag
Hindi.:Munga
Kan.:Hesara, Hesoruballi
Kash.:--
Mal.:Cherupayar
Mar.:Mung
Ori.:Muga, Jaimuga
Punj.:Munga, Mungi
Tam.:Pattchai Payaru, Pasi Payaru, Siru Murg
Tel.:Pesalu, Peachha Peralu
Urdu.:Moong
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic:
Seed small, globular, about 0.4 cm long roughly square, smooth with white lateral  
hilum; usually green but some times yellowish-green; odour, not distinct; taste, slightly  
sweet 
b)  Microscopic:
Seed coat shows a single layered, radially elongated, palisade-like cells, covered  
with a striated cuticle and supported internally by a single layered, thin walled bearer 
cells,  followed  by  4-6  layered,  thin-walled,  tangentially  elongated,  elliptical,  
parenchymatous  cells;  cotyledons  consist  of  oval  of  polygonal,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells having round to oval, simple, starch grains measuring 8-33 µ in 
dia. and rarely, oil globules. 
Powder  - Cream coloured; shows palisade-like cells, oval to polygonal, thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells; round to oval, simple, starch grains measuring 8-33 µ in dia. and 
occasional oil globules. 
 123 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4: 1 :5) shows under UV (366 nm ) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.56, 0.65,  
0.82 and 0.95 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.01,  
0.34, 0.56, 0.65, 0.78, 0.86 and 0.95 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic  
Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 105 °C seven spots appear  
at Rf. 0.26 (grey), 0.34 (violet), 0.65 (pink), 0.73 (pink), 0.82 (violet), 0.91 (violet) and  
0.95 (pink). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Saponin, Starch, Albuminoids and Oil.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Gr¡h¢, Kaphahara, Pittahara, Var¸ya, Balaprada, Netrya 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Bal¡ha¶h¡di Taila, Marma Gu¶ik¡, K¡yasthy¡di  
Varti.
THERAPEUTIC USES - Jvara, Netra Roga, Amlapitta
DOSE - 50-100 g. for yusa.
 124 57. Mulaka (Sd.) 
MÍLAKA  (Seed)
M£laka consists of dried seed of Raphanus sativus Linn. (Fam. Brassicaceae); a 
biennial herb, cultivated throughout India, upto 3000 m in the Himalayas and other hilly  
regions, for its roots. 
SYNONYMS-
Sansk.:á¡l¡marka¶aka, Visra, á¡leya, Marusambhava
Assam.:Mulo
Beng.:Mula
Eng.:Radish
Guj.:Mulo
Hindi.:Muli
Kan.:Moolangi, Moolaogi, Mullangi, Mugunigadde
Kash.:--
Mal.:Mullanki
Mar.:Mula
Ori.:Mula, Rakhyasmula
Punj.:Moolak, Moolee, Moola
Tam.:Mullangi, Mulakam, Mullangu, Millangi
Tel.:Mullangi
Urdu.:Turb, Mooli
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Seed reddish-brown, irregularly globose, sometimes flattened, 2-4 mm long and 2  
mm wide; surface generally smooth and sometimes wrinkled and grooved at micropylar  
end; taste, oily. 
b)  Microscopic:
Seed shows testa; consisting of single layer of nearly rectangular cells, covered  
with thin cuticle, followed by a layer of radially elongated, reddish-brown columnar  
cells,  and  integument  2-3  layers  of  compressed,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells;  
cotyledons and embryo consist of oval to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells  
containing aleurone grains and oil globules. 
Powder -  Brownish-yellow;  shows  fragments  of  testa  with  hexagonal,  thin-walled  
epidermis cells in surface view; oval to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells of  
embryo and cotyledon; oil globules and aleurone grains present. 
 125 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than5.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 4.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 11Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Eth lacetate 
(9: 1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) a fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.95 (blue). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.17, 0.31, 0.39, 0.70 and 0.95 (all yellow). On  
spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten 
minutes four spots appear at Rf. 0.17, 0.31, 0.39 and 0.95 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS - Fixed Oil and Volatile Oil. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
  
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Gr¡h¢,  H¤dya,  Ka¸¶hya,  Kaphav¡tahara,  ViÀahara,  
V¡ta¿leÀmahara,  Vahnid¢pana,  Garbthasayasamikocaka,  
Kaphaniss¡raka, M£ral, P¡caka, Vit¡nulomana, M¤durecaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - SarÀp¡di Lepa
THERAPEUTIC USES - Gulma, H¤droga, Ka¸¶ha Roga, SidhmakuÀ¶ha Jvara,Sv¡sa,  
N¡sik¡ Roga, AkÀi Roga, An¡rtava
DOSE - 1-3 g. of the drug in powder form. 
 126 58. Munditika (Lf.) 
MUÛÚÌTIKË (Leaf)
Munditika consists of dried leaf of Sphaeranthus indicus Linn. (Fam. Asteraceae);  
an aromatic, much branched herb, 30-60 cm high found abundantly in damp and shady  
places in plains all over the country, ascending to an altitude of 1,500 m in the hills. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Mu¸·¢, ár¡va¸¢, Kadamba, PuÀpik¡, Alambusta
Assam.:Kamadarus
Beng:Surmuriya, Chhagal Nadi, Mudmudiya
Eng.:--
Guj.:Gorakhmundi
Hindi.:Mundi
Kan.:Mundi
Kash.:--
Mal.:Mirnagnee, Atookamanni, Mirangnee
Mar.:Mundi, Baras Bondi
Ori.:Buikadam
Punj.:Gorakhmundi
Tam.:Kotook, Karandai, Kottakarthai
Tel.:Bodasaramu, Bodataramu
Urdu.:Mundi
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Leaf sessile, decurrent, 2-7 cm long, 1-1.5 cm wide, obovate-oblong, narrowed to  
the  base,  dentate  or  serrate,  hairy,  greenish-brown;  odour,  slightly  aromatic,  but  
disappears on long storage; taste, bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Leaf -
Midrib - Shows a single layered epidermis, covered with ordinary trichomes upto 5 cells  
high and glandular trichomes having unicellular stalk and group of 4-10 cells head, on  
both surfaces, followed in turn by 4-6 layered collenchyma and 3-4 layered parenchyma  
cells at both surfaces; vascular bundles 3-4, situated centrally having usual elements,  
xylem vessels arranged radially. 
Lamina - Shows a single layered epidermis having numerous trichomes similar to those  
of  midrib  on  both  surfaces;  mesophyll  not  differentiated  into  palisade  and  spongy  
parenchyma cells; stomata anisocytic present on both surfaces, stomatal index 32-38 on  
lower surface and 20- 29 on upper surface, stomatal number 47-54 on lower surface and  
15-22 on upper surface, vein islet number 20-26. 
 127 Powder  -  Light  greenish-brown;  shows  fragments  of  parenchyma,  glandular  hairs,  
multicellular trichomes, xylem vessels, polygonal, wavy, thin-walled epidermal cells in  
surface view, stomata, ordinary trichomes upto 5 cells high and glandular trichomes  
having unicellular stalk and a head of 4-1 0 cells. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than28Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 12Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol  
(9 : 1) shows three spots at Rf. 0.27, 0.72 and 0.90 (all yellowish green) in visible light.  
Under U.V. (366 nm) five fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.27, 0.42 (both blue).  
0.54 (orange), 0.72 and 0.90 (both blue). On spraying with 5% Vanillin-Sulphuric acid  
reagent and heating the plate at 110 °C for ten minutes three spots appear at Rf. 0.27,  
0.72 (both grey corresponding to Citral) and 0.96 (blue). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential Oil. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
  
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Medhya, ViÀaghna, V¡takaphahara, Ar¿adoÀa, Vin¡¿aka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Navaratnar¡ja, M¤g¡nka Rasa, Arka Mu¸·¢
THERAPEUTIC USES - Gan·am¡l¡, Apaci, KuÀ¶ha, K¤mi, P¡¸·u, Sl¢pada,  
Medaroga, Apasm¡ra, K¡sa, M£trak¤cchra, Tvaka Roga,  
Stana Saithalya, Yonirog¡, Ëm¡tisara, Ëmaroga, V¡taroga,  
Gudaroga, Pl¢h¡roga, Chardi, Ëmav¡ta, G¡tradurgandhya, S
£ry¡varta, Ardh¡vabh¡vabhedaka
DOSE - 3-6 g. of the drug.
 128  129 59. Musta (Rz.) 
MUSTË (Rhizome)
Must¡ consists of dried rhizome of Cyperus rotundus Linn. (Fam. Cyperaceae);  
occurring throughout the country, common in waste grounds, gardens and roadsides,  
upto an elevation of 1800 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Mustaka, V¡rida
Assam.:Mutha, Somad Koophee
Beng.:Mutha, Musta
Eng.:Nut Grass
Guj.:Moth, Nagarmoth
Hindi.:Motha, Nagarmotha
Kan.:Konnari Gadde
Kash.:--
Mal.:Muthanga, Kari Mustan
Mar.:Moth, Nagarmoth, Motha, Bimbal
Ori.:--
Punj.:Mutha, Motha
Tam.:Korai, Korai-Kizhangu
Tel.:Tungamustalu
Urdu.:Sad Kufi
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug consists of rhizome and stolon having a number of wiry roots, stolon 10-20  
cm long having a number of rhizomes, crowded together on the stolons, rhizomes bluntly  
conical and vary in size and thickness, crowned with the remains of stem and leaves  
forming a scaly covering, dark brown or black externally, creamish-yellow internally;  
odour, pleasant. 
b)  Microscopic:
Rhizome  shows  single  layered  epidermis,  followed  by  2-6  layers,  suberised  
sclerenchymatous cells; epidermis and outer sclerenchymatous layers filled with dark  
brown  content;  ground  tissue  of  cortex  consists  of  circular  to  oval,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous  cells  with  small  intercellular  spaces;  a  few  fibro-vascular  bundles  
present in this region; endoderm is distinct and surrounding the stele; wide central zone  
beneath endodermis, composed of circular to oval, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells  
with intercellular spaces, numerous collateral, closed, vascular bundles surrounded by  
bundle sheath, scattered in this region; vessels narrow having simple reticulate, and  
scalariform thickening and oblique pore; simple round to oval starch grains measuring  
6-28 µ in dia., a number of pigmented cells filled with reddish-brown content, present  
throughout the cortex and stele.
 130  
Powder -  Creamish-brown;  shows  reddish-brown  cells,  reticulate  and  simple  pitted  
vessels;  fibre-like,  closely  packed  sclerified  cells,  narrow  vessels  with  scalariform  
thickness and oblique pore from the remnants of leaves simple, round to oval, starch  
grains, measuring 6-28 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 11Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
Volatile oil Not less than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.10
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9:1) shows under UV (366 nm) a fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.88 (blue). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.44, 0.55 and 0.73 (all yellow). On spraying  
with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 105 °C three 
spots appear at Rf. 0.44, 0.55 and 0.73 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Volatile Oil
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :áothahara,  D¢pana,  Gr¡h¢,  K¤mighna,  P¡cana,  ViÀaghna,  
Pittakaphahara,  Sthoulyahara,  T¤À¸¡nigrahana,  TvakadoÀahara,  
Jvaraghna 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Musak¡riÀ¶a, Must¡k¡di Kv¡tha, A¿ok¡riÀ¶a,  
Mustak¡di C£r¸a, Mustak¡di, Mustak¡di  
Lehya, Dh¡mya Pancaka Kv¡tha C£r¸a,  
PiyuÀavalli Rasa, Gulmak¡t¡nala Rasa,  
Mah¡l¡kÀ¡di Taila, áa·angap¡neeya
THERAPEUTIC USES - Agnim¡ndya, Ajer¸a, T¤À¸¡, Jvara, Sangr¡ha¸¢, áv¡sa,  
K¡sa, M£trak¤cchra, Vamana, Stanyavik¡ra, Sutik¡roga,  
Atis¡ra, Ëmav¡ta, K¤imiroga
DOSE - 3-6 g. (Powder).
              20-30 ml. (Kwatha).
 131 60. Nagavalli (Lf.) 
NËGAVALLÌ (Leaf)
N¡gavall¢ consists of leaf of  Piper betle  Linn. (Fam. Piperaceae); a dioecious,  
perennial creeper, climbing by many short adventitious rootlets, widely cultivated in  
hotter and damper parts of the country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:T¡mbul¢
Assam.:Pan
Beng.:Pan
Eng.:Betel Leaf
Guj.:Pan
Hindi.:Pan
Kan.:Veelyadele Ele
Kash.:--
Mal.:Vettila
Mar.:Pan, Nagvel, Vidyachepan
Ori.:--
Punj.:Pan
Tam.:Vettilai
Tel.:Tamalapaku, Tamulapaku
Urdu.:Pan
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Leaf varies greatly in size, 7.5-20.0 cm, ovate cordate, entire, glabrous, apex  
acuminate to acute, lamina membranous, upper surface deep green and lower surface  
lighter  in  colour,  primary  or  sub-primary  nerves  usually  7,  sometimes  5-9;  odour,  
aromatic; taste, stightly pungent. 
b)  Microscopic:
Leaf -
Petiole - Single layered epidermis composed of cubical to slightly tangentially elongated  
cells  covered  with  thick,  striated  cuticle;  epidermal  cells  elongate  to  form  uni  to  
bicellular,  occasionally  multicellular  hairs;  epidermis  followed  by  a  discontinuous  
collenchymatous zone in the form of arcs, and a multilayered parenchymatous zone;  
vascular bundles arranged in the arcs, phloem surrounds xylem; vascular bundles usually  
of two sizes larger ones 7 in number and smaller ones 2 in number.
Midrib - Epidermis single layered, composed of colourless cubical cells, covered with  
wavy  cuticle;  epidermis  followed  by  2-3  layers  of  irregular  colourless  cells  of  
hypodermis  and  a  few  layers  of  collenchyma,  towards  lower  side  collenchyma  
 132 multilayered; vascular bundle shows phloem surrounding xylem; lower epidermis single  
layered and covered with wavy cuticle; some epidermal cells elongate to form uni to  
bicellular-occasionally multicellular hairs. 
Lamina - Shows dorsi ventral structure; epidermis single layered, tangentially elongated,  
covered  with  thick  striated  cuticle  on  both  sides;  hypodermis  2-3  layered;  having  
chloroplasts, occasionally with secretory cells; mesophyll differentiated into palisade  
and  spongy  parenchyma;  palisade  single  layered;  spongy  parenchyma  3-4  layered  
composed of irregularly round cells, a few secretory cells also present in this region;  
hairs a few uni to bicellular, occasionally multicellular, all being uniseriate present on  
both surfaces; stomata anisocytic palisade ratio not over 4; stomatal index 11-13; vein  
islet number 2-7. 
Powder - Greyish-green; shows polygonal epidermal cells in surface view, simple pitted  
vessels and a few uni to tricellular hairs, anisocytic type of stomata, palisade and spongy  
parenchyma cells and simple pitted vessel. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than17Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 20Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9 : 1) shows in visible light five spots at Rf. 0.11 (green), 0.18 (light green), 0.23  
(yellow), 0.34 (grey) and 0.61 (greyish green). Under U.V. (366 nm) seven fluorescent  
zones are visible at Rf. 0.11, 0.16 (both pink), 0.23 (brown), 0.34 (pink), 0.43 (pink),  
0.61 (pink) and 0.76 (grey). On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf.  
0.08, 0.11. 0.18. 0.34, 0.61, 0.76 and 0.88 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-
Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C seven spots appear  
at Rf. 0.08, 0.11, 0.18 (all the three greenish grey), 0.34 (grey), 0.43 (violet), 0.61 and  
0.76 (both light green). 
CONSTITUENTS - Essential Oil, Amino Acids, Vitamins and Enzymes. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Sara, ÙikÀ¸a, Va¿ada 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :áleÀmahara,  Balya,  R£cya,  Sramahara,  Mukhadourgandhyahara,  
Mukhamalahara, V¡ta Hara, Raktapittakarni, Svaryam, V¤Àya. 
 133  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Lokan¡tha Rasa , PuÀpadhanv¡ Rasa, B¤hat  
Sarvajvarahara Lauha, Laghu Suta¿ekhara  
Rasa, B¤hat ViÀamajvar¡ntaka Rasa
THERAPEUTIC USES - Ka¸·u, H¤ll¡sa, Agnim¡ndya, Jvara, H¤droga,  
Svarabheda
DOSE - 10-20 ml of Swarasa.
 134 61. Narikela (Endos.) 
NËRIKELA  (Endosperm)
N¡rikela consists of dried endosperm of Cocos nucifera Linn. (Fam. Arecaceae),  
a tall palm, bearing a crown of large pinnate leaves, cultivated in coastal and deltaic  
regions of South India. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk:N¡rikela, T¤¸ar¡ja
Assam.:Khopra
Beng.:Narikel, Narikel
Eng.:Coconut Palm
Guj.:Naliar, Nariyel, Shriphal, Koprun
Hindi.:Nariyal, Gola
Kan.:Khobbari, Tengnamara, Temgu, Thengu, Thenginamara
Kash.:--
Mal.:Nalikeram, Ten, Thengu, Keram
Mar.:Naral
Ori.:Nariyal
Punj.:Narela, Khopra, Garigola
Tam.:Tenkai, Kopparai
Tel.:Narikelamu, Tenkay, Kobbari
Urdu.:Narjil, Narial
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug available whole as well as in broken pieces of endosperm, whole drug 8 -14  
cm in size; ovoid, three angled, outer surface brown, somewhat rough due to shallow,  
reticulated striations; transversely broken; whole drug shows 0.8-1.2 cm thick, white  
endosperm and a large central cavity; fracture, short; odour, faint; taste, sweetish and  
oily. 
b)  Microscopic:
Endosperm  shows  testa,  consisting  of  irregularly  arranged,  brown,  compact,  
parenchymatous cells; beneath testa a very wide zone, consisting of outer 2-3 layers,  
thin-walled, smaller and angular parenchymatous cells, followed by radially elongated,  
larger  and  thin-walled  parenchymatous  cells,  containing  numerous  aleurone  grains,  
raphides, prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and oil globules. 
Powder  -  White  and  oily;  shows  thin-walled.  parenchymatous  cells,  fragments  of  
polyhedral,  thin-walled,  testa  cells  in  surface  view,  aleurone  grains,  oil  globules,  
raphides, a few prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and vessels. 
 135 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Nil Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than2.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 13Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
Fixed oil Not less than59Per cent, Appendix 2.2.8
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(93 : 7) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.91 and 0.98 (both  
blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.33, 0.91 and 0.98 (all  
yellow). On spraying with Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at  
105°C for fifteen minutes three spots appear at Rf. 0.33, 0.91 and 0.98 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya, H¤dya, V¤Àya, V¡tahara Pittahara, Kaphakara, B¤mha¸a,  
Basti¿odhaka, ViÀ¶ambhi 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - N¡rikela Kha¸·a,   N¡rikela Lava¸
THERAPEUTIC USES - D¡ha, KÀata, K¿aya, Raktapitta, T¤À¸¡, áoÀa, á£la
DOSE - 10-20 g. of the drug in powder form.
 136 62. Nichula (Frt.)
NICULA (Fruit)
Nicula consists of dried fruit of  Barringtonia acutangula  (Linn.) Gaertn. (Fam.  
Lecythidaceae);  a  moderate  sized,  evergreen,  glabrous  tree,  fairly  common  in  sub  
Himalayan tracts Bihar, Orissa, Bengal, Assam, Central and South India. It prefers moist  
situations but is not found in mangrove forests. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Hijjala, Vidula
Assam.:Hindole
Beng.:Hijjala
Eng.:--
Guj.:Samudraphala
Hindi.:Hijjala, Samudraphala
Kan.:Nerruganegalu, Holegonvamara
Kash.:--
Mal.:Manjal Kadamba, Manjal Kadam
Mar.:Samudraphala
Ori.:Kijolo
Punj.:Samuderphal
Tam.:Samudrapullarni, Samutrapalam
Tel.:Kanapu, Kadaps
Urdu.:Hijjal
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Fruit  -  A  drupe,  yellowish-brown,  oblong,  2.5-3.3  by  1.00  -  1.3  cm,  bluntly  
quadrangular, broadest in the middle, slightly narrow and truncate at each end, fibrous;  
no characteristic odour and taste. 
Seed - Single, 2-2.5 by 0.7-1.0 cm, wrinkled longitudinally, dark brown in colour.
b)  Microscopic:
Fruit  -  Epicarp  shows  several  layers  of  tangentially  elongated,  thin-walled  
parenchymatous cells; mesocarp composed of several layers of loosely arranged, thin-
walled parenchymatous cells with intercellular spaces forming cavities; vascular bundles  
found scattered in this region; endocarp not distinct; a few rosette crystals of calcium  
oxalate in the form of irregular cluster, present in this region.
 
Seed  - Shows two integuments, endosperm and embryo; outer integument consists of  
single layered epidermis, 2-3 layered sclereids and 7-10 layered closely arranged cells;  
 137 vascular bundles also found scattered in this region; inner integument consists of 1-2  
layered, crushed cells; endosperm and embryo consists of isodiametric cells having small  
intercellular spaces; abundant, irregular starch grains, single and compound found scat -
tered in cells of endosperm simple, 4-27 µ in dia., round to oval.
Powder - Whitish-purple; shows a few parenchymatous, brown coloured cells rosettes of  
calcium  oxalate  crystals  in  cluster  numerous  simple  and  compound  starch  grains,  
measuring 4-27 µ in dia. a few xylem vessels with spiral thickening. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 9Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4: 1 :5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.56  
(blue), 0.81 (black) and 0.94 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots appear at  
Rf. 0.41, 0.48, 0.56, 0.61, 0.81, 0.87, 0.92 and 0.96 (all yellow). On spraying with 5%  
Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes eight  
spots appear at Rf. 0.14 (brown), 0.41, 0.48, 0.56, 0.61 (all violet), 0.87 (blue), 0.92  
(violet) and 0.96 (brown). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Saponins and Sapogenins. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Sa´gr¡h¢, V¡maka, ViÀaghna, Vra¸asodhana, Recaka,  
Rak¿oghna, V¡tahara. 
 IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Mah¡pancagavya Gh¤ta, LakÀm¢ Vil¡sa Rasa  
(N¡rd¢ya), Nyagrodh¡di Ga¸a Kv¡tha
THERAPEUTIC USES - Raktapitta, Ëm¡tis¡ra, CakÀusr¡va, Galga¸·a, Bh£tab¡dh¡  
Grahab¡dh¡, Prameha
DOSE - 1-3 g.
 138 63. Nili (W.P.) 
NÌLÌ (Whole Plant)
N¢l¢ consists of dried whole plant of Indigofera tinctoria Linn. (Fam. Fabaceae);  
a shrub, 1.2-1.8 m high, found nearly throughout the country and widely cultivated in  
many parts of the country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:N¢lin¢,N¢lpuÀpa, K¡lke¿¢
Assam.:Nilbam
Beng.:Nil
Eng.:Indigo Plant
Guj.:Nil, Gali
Hindi.:Nili
Kan.:Kadu Nili, Nili
Kash.:--
Mal.:Avuri, Amari
Mar.:Nili, Neel
Ori.:--
Punj.:Neel
Tam.:Avuri
Tel.:Nili, Kondannili
Urdu.:Neel
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root - Tap root having lateral roots, pale yellow to light yellowish-brown, hard, woody,  
cylindrical,  nearly  smooth  except  for  a  few  having  scattered  lenticels;  odour,  not  
distinct; taste, slightly bitter.
Stem - Pieces woody, hard, slender, cylindrical, 0.1 to 1.5 cm in dia., surface, smooth,  
lenticels present; yellowish-green to greyish-brown in colour; no characteristic odour  
and taste.
Leaf - Compound, imparipinnate; leaflets, 1-5 cm long and 0.3-1.2 cm wide, oblong or  
oblanceolate with short mucronate tip; pale green to greenish-black; no characteristic  
odour and taste. 
Flower - Numerous in nearly sessile spicate racemes, 10.0 cm long; calyx 1.2-1.5 mm  
long, hairy outside, teeth triangular, acute, as long as tube; corolla pink, papilionaceous,  
4 mm long, back of standard petal pubescent, stamen 10, diadelphous; ovary sessile,  
linear, downy; stigma capitate. 
 139 Fruit - Pod nearly cylindrical. straight or slightly curved, apiculate, 2-3.2 cm long and  
0.15-0.2 cm in dia., having 8-12 seeds; smooth, brown to dark brown. 
Seed - Somewhat quadrangular with truncate ends, 0.2 cm long and 0.1 cm wide,  
smooth, yellowish-brown to greenish-brown in colour. 
b)  Microscopic:
Root - Shows a narrow zone of cork, consisting of 4-10  layers of tangentially elongated,  
rectangular, thin-walled cells, with lenticels; secondary cortex a narrow zone, consisting  
of  rectangular  to  polygonal,  thin-walled  cells  containing  rhomboidal  to  hexagonal  
crystals of calcaim oxalate; and groups of fibres; secondary phloem composed of usual  
elements; secondary xylem consisting of xylem parenchyma, vessels, fibres and rays;  
fibres large aseptate with pointed end; vessels solitary or 2-4 in groups having simple  
pits; medullary ray 1-4 cells wide; prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate present in  
secondary cortex, phloem, xylem parenchyma and rays; oil globules present in cortex  
and phloem parenchyma; starch grains simple, round to oval, measuring 3-11 µ in dia. 
present in cortex, phloem, xylem parenchyma and rays. . 
Stem - Young stem furrowed and ridged in outline; epidermis single layered, 5-10 layers  
of  collenchymatous  cells  present  in  ridges;  mature  stem  shows  5-15  layers  of  
tangentially elongated, rectangular, thin-walled cork cells, broken by lenticels, a few  
upper rectagular cells filled with reddish-brown contents; secondary cortex consists of  
5-7  layers  of  oval  to  elliptical,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells,  pericycle  a  
discontinuous ring of fibres; secondary phloem and secondary xylem composed of usual  
elements; xylem traversed by rays; vessels solitary or 2-7 in radial rows, isolated vessels  
show spiral thickening and simple pits; fibres having narrow lumen and pointed ends;  
tracheids pitted; crystal fibres 4-12 chambered; each containing lor 2 prismatic crystals  
of calcium oxalate; pith occupied by isodiametric, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; a  
few cells of secondary cortex, phloem and pith contain brown coloured substances;  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and simple starch grains measuring 3-6 µ in dia. 
found in secondary cortex, phloem and xylem parenchyma, pith and rays. 
Leaf -
Petiole - appears nearly circular in outline having two lateral wings; epidermis single  
layered, covered externally with thin cuticle and followed internally by single layered  
collenchymatous hypodermis; unicellular hairs scanty' to moderate with blunt tip; cortex  
4-6 layered, consisting of oval to polygonal, elongated, thin-walled chlorenchymatous  
cells; pericycle scanty, present in the form of continuous or discontinuous ring; vascular  
bundle collateral and three in number; large one present in centre and two smaller in  
lateral wings; pith composed of rounded to oval, thin-walled parenchymatous cells; a  
few prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate present in phloem and pith region.
 140 Midrib - shows a similar structure of epidermis, cuticle and hairs as in petioles;lower  
and  upper  epidermis  followed  by  single  and  2  or  3  layers  of  collenchymatous  
hypodermis respectively; parenchyma 2 or 3 layered, present on both sides; vascular  
bundle single, collateral, crescent-shaped, present centrally. 
Lamina - shows a dorsiventral structure; epidermis, cuticle and hairs as in petiole and  
midrib; palisade 2 layered; spongy parenchyma 2-4 layered; a few patches of veins  
scattered between palisade and spongy parenchyma; a few prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate present in mesophyll cells; stomata paracytic and unicellular hairs present on  
both surface but abundant on lower surface; palisade ratio not more than 4; stomatal  
index 18-40 on lower surface and 10-16 on upper surface; vein islet number 15-18. 
Fruit - Shows single layered epicarp; mesocarp 7-8 layered, more or less elliptical,  
tangentially, elongated, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, a few upper cells contain  
reddish brown content; vascular bundle present in the mesocarp region towards both  
ends, covered by sclerenchymatous sheath; endocarp present in the form of 3-5 layers of  
sclerenchymatous cells.
 
Seed -  Shows  a  single  layered,  radially  elongated,  thin-walled,  palisade-like  cells,  
covered externally by a thin cuticle and internally, followed by a single layer of bearer  
cells;  beneath  bearer  cells  2-4  tangentially  elongated  elliptical,  thin-walled  
parenchymatous cells present; cotyledons consists of oval to angular, elongated, thin-
walled parenchymatous cells.
Powder - Yellowish grey; shows aseptate fibres, vessels with spiral thickening and  
simple pits; groups of mesophyll cells, unicellular hairs; pieces of hexagonal, straight  
walled, epidermal cells in surface view; prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, rarely oil  
globules, and simple, rounded to oval, starch grains measuring 3-11 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than5.2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1.0Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 2.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 7.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : glacial  
Acetic acid: Water (5 : 1: 4) in visible light shows three spots at Rf. 0.38, 0.75 and 0.88  
(all grey). On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.15, 0.38, 0.50, 0.59,  
0.67, 0.75 and 0.88 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-sulphuric acid reagent  
and heating the plate at 110 °C for ten minutes nine spots appear at Rf. 0.15, 0.25, 0.38,  
0.50, 0.59, 0.67, 0.75, 0.84 and 0.88 (all grey). 
 141 CONSTITUENTS - Glycoside (Indican). 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Jantughna, Kaphahara, Ke¿ya, V¡tahara, ViÀaghna, Recan¢ 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - N¢lik¡dya Taila, Gorocan¡di  Va¶¢
THERAPEUTIC USES - V¡ta Rakta, Udararoga, Pl¢h¡roga, K¤miroga, Moha,  
Bhrama, Ud¡varta, Ka¶ivata, K¡sa, Ëmaroga, Vi¿odara,  
Jvara, KÀaya, K¤midanta.
DOSE - 10-20 g. of the drug for decoction.
 142 64. Nirgundi (Lf.)
NIRGUÛÚÌ (Leaf)
Nirgu¸·¢ consists of dried leaf of  Vitex negundo  Linn. (Fam. Verbenaceae); a  
large aromatic shrub or a small tree, upto 4.5 m in height, common throughout the  
country ascending to an altitude of 1500 m in the outer Himalayas. It is common in  
waste places around villages, river banks, moist localities and in the deciduous forests. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Sinduv¡ra, Samph¡lika, N¢la
Assam.:Aslak
Beng.:Nirgundi, Nishinda
Eng.:Five Leaved Chaste tree
Guj.:Nagod
Hindi.:Nirgundi, Sinduar, Sambhalu
Kan.:Lakkigida, Nekkigida
Kash.:--
Mal.:Indranee, Nirgundi
Mar.:Nirgundi
Ori.:--
Punj.:Sambhalu, Banna
Tam.:Karunochchi, Nocchi
Tel.:Nallavavilli, Vavili
Urdu.:Sambhalu, Panjangusht
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Leaves  palmately  compound,  petiole  2.5  -  3.8  cm  long;  mostly  trifoliate,  
occasionally pentafoliate; in trifoliate leaf, leaflet lanceolate or narrowly lanceolate,  
middle leaflet 5- 10 cm long and 1.6 -3.2 cm broad, with 1- 1.3 cm long petiolule,  
remaining two sub-sessile; in pentafoliate leaf inner three leaflets have petiolule and  
remaining  two  sub-sessile;  surface  glabrous  above  and  tomentose  beneath;  texture,  
leathery. 
b)  Microscopic:
Petiole - shows single layered epidermis having a number of unicellular, bicellular and  
uniseriate multicellular covering trichomes and also glandular trichomes with uni to  
tricellular stalk and uni to bicellular head; cortex composed of outer collenchymatous  
tissue and inner 6 - 8 layers of parenchymatous tissue; collenchyma well developed in  
basal region and gradually decreases in middle and apical regions; pericyclic fibres  
absent in basal region of petiole and present in the form of a discontinuous ring in apical  
region surrounding central horse shoe-shaped vascular bundle; a few smaller vascular  
 143 bundles present ventrally between arms of central vascular bundle and two, or rarely  
three, bundles situated outside the arms. 
Lamina  - shows  single  layered  epidermis  having  mostly  unicellular  hairs,  bi  and  
multicellular and glandular trichomes being rare; hypodermis 1 - 3 layered interrupted at  
places by 4- 8 palisade layers containing chlorophyll; a large number of veins enclosed  
by  bundle  sheath  traverse  mesophyll;  stomata  present  only  on  the  ventral  surface,  
covered densely with trichomes; vein-islet and vein termination number of leaf are 23-25  
and 5-7 respectively. 
Powder - shows number of pieces or whole, uni-bi and multicellular covering trichomes,  
glandular trichomes, palisade tissues with hypodermis, and upper and lower epidermis,  
xylem vessels with pitted walls. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 20Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G'  plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9:1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.18 (blue) and 0.47 (red).  
On exposure to Iodine vapour four spots appear at Rf. 0.16, 0.47, 0.67 and 0.91 (all  
yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and on heating the plate for  
ten minutes at 105 ° C four spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.47, 0.58 and 0.67 (all blue). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids and Essential Oil.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Ke¿ya,  Kapha¿¡maka,  V¡ta¿¡maka,  áophahara,  CakÀuÀyam  
ViÀaghna, Smtriprada, Anulomna 
 
 144 IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Vatagaj¡´ku¿a Rasa, Mah¡vata Vidhvansana Rasa,  
Yk¤plih¡ra Lauha, Da¿amula Taila, Trivikrama  
Rasa, Nirgu¸·¢ Taila, Tribhuvan K¢rti Rasa,  
ViÀa Tinduka Taila.
THERAPEUTIC USES - á£la, áopha, V¡tavy¡dhi, Ëmav¡ta, KuÀ¶ha, Ka¸·u, K¡sa,  
Pradara, Ëdhm¡na, P¢h¡ Roga, Gulma, Aruci, K¤mi, Vra¸a,  
N¡·¢ Vra¸a, Kar¸a¿£la, S£tik¡, Jvara
DOSE - 10-20 ml. (Swarasa).
 145 65. Padmaka (Ht.Wd.)
PADMAKA (Heart Wood) 
Padmaka consists of heart wood of Prunus cerasoides; D. Don (Fam. Rosaceae); a  
middle or large sized tree, found  in temperate Himalayan region  from Garhwal to  
Sikkim upto an elevation of 910-1820 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Padmagandhi, Pitarakta
Assam.:Diengsoh-iog-Krems
Beng.:Padmakastha
Eng.:Biyd Cherry
Guj.:Padmakastha, Padmaka
Hindi.:Padmakha, Padma Kastha, Paja
Kan.:Padmaka
Kash.:--
Mal.:Pathimukam
Mar.:Padmakastha, Padmaka
Ori.:--
Punj.:Pajja
Tam.:Padmakashdham
Tel.:Padmakashtham
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug available in variable pieces, yellowish-brown to orange, to which some  
whitish portion of sap wood still attached; heavy, dense, moderately hard and very  
strong, odour, very faint; no taste. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature heart wood consisting of vessels, fibres, tracheids and xylem parenchyma  
traversed  by  xylem  rays;  vessels  lignified,  moderately  thick-walled,  reticulate  
thickening, fairly large, with bordered pits having an oval-shaped, lateral perforation at  
each end, measuring, upto 220 µ in length and upto 68 µ in width; fibres occur mostly in  
groups, usually found associated with other xylem elements, moderately thick-walled,  
narrow lumen, pointed at both ends, 55-137  µ long; tracheids usually thick-walled,  
lignified,  elongated  cells;  xylem  parenchyma  composed  of  thick-walled,  found  
associated with vessels and fibres, oval to elongated, polygonal cells; xylem rays uni to  
multiseriate, uni and biseriate more common, multiseriate, generally 3-6 cells wide,  
40-50 cells high;  cut materials, when treated with ferric chloride solution  turn the  
yellow pigments blue or black, indicating tannin
 146 Powder - Reddish-brown; shows fragments of abundant groups or single pointed fibres  
measuring  55-137  µ in  length,  moderately  thick-walled,  fairly  large  vessels  with  
reticulate thickening and bordered pits, thick-walled, lignified tracheid cells, pieces of  
ray cells and xylem parenchyma cells. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9 : 1) shows under UV (366 nm) a fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.64 (blue). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.15, 0.32, 0.42, 0.53, 0.59, 0.64 and 0.76 (all  
yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten  
minutes at 105°C four spots appear at Rf. 0.15, 0.32, 0.53 and 0.59 (all violet).
CONSTITUENTS - Flavonoids.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Garbhasth¡pana, R£cya, V¡tala 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Khadir¡di Gu¶ik¡, Guducy¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a, B
¤hacch¡gat¡dya Gh¤ta, áat¡vary¡di Gh¤ta,  
Guducy¡di Taila, U¿ir¡sava, Candan¡sava,  
Da¿am£l¡riÀ¶a, M¤tasanjivan¢ Sur¡, Karp
£r¡dhyarka
THERAPEUTIC USES - ViÀpho¶a, D¡ha, KuÀ¶ha, Raktapitta, Vami, T¤À¡, Bhrama,  
Visarapa
DOSE - 1-3 g. (Curna).
 147 66. Patala (Rt.) 
PËÙALË (Root)
P¡¶al¡  consists  of  dried  root  of  Stereospermum  suaveolens  DC.  (Fam. 
Bignoniaceae); a large deciducus tree upto 18 m high and 1.8 m in girth with a clear bole  
of about 9 m, found throughout the moist parts of the country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Amogh¡, Madhud£t¢, K¤À¸v¤nt¡, T¡mrapuÀp¢
Assam.:Parul
Beng.:Parul
Eng.:Rose Flower Fragrant
Guj.:Podal
Hindi.:Podal
Kan.:Padramora
Kash.:--
Mal.:Padiri
Mar.:Padal
Ori.:Boro, Patulee
Punj.:Padal
Tam.:Padari
Tel.:Kaligottu, Kokkesa, Podira
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root  occurs  in  about  6-9  cm  long,  1-1.5  cm  thick  cut  pieces,  cylindrical,  
externally brown to creamy, rough due to vertical fissures, cracks, ridges and transverse  
fine lenticels, internally dark brown, lamellation or stratification due to presence of  
concentric bands of fibres; fracture tough and fibrous; odour, not distinct; taste, bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Root cork consists of 25-35 layers of rectangular cells with 3-5 stratified layers,  
lignification being more prominent where the stratification starts, arranged with 1-3  
tangential rows of narrow cells alternating with 3-5 tangential rows of wider cells; cork  
cambium  composed of 1  -2 layers of tangentially  elongated cells; secondary cortex  
arranged more or less radially, becomes polyhedral to isodiameteric in inner region, a  
few  cells  getting  converted  into  stone  cells  which  are  regular  in  shape  and  show  
projection;  secondary  phloem  wide,  forms  cerantenchyma  between  two  obliquely  
running rays; some rays and phloem cells get converted into irregular, polygonal shaped  
stone cells, measuring 10- 150 µ in width, phloem parenchyma being intact; medullary  
rays multiseriate, being 3-4 cells wide, and 8-11-15 cells high; fibres tapering, pointed or  
 148 slightly blunt, with a small peg-like projection at both ends; sieve tube gets collapsed in  
outer region forming strips of ceratenchyma; a few small microsphenoidal crystals of  
calcium oxalate present in phloem parenchyma and rays; secondary xylem wide having  
usual elements; vessels simple, pitted, lignified; fibres large, pointed, aseptate; rays  
multiseriate, 2- 3 cells wide. 
Powder  - Dark brown; shows fragments of rectangular cork and phloem parenchyma  
cells; groups of single, thick- walled, cubical to rectangular, lignified stone cells having  
striations and wide lumen; a number of microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate,  
intact and scattered outside. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 20Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4: 1 :5) shows in visible light three spots at Rf. 0.62, 0.85 and 0.92 (all light  
yellow). Under UV (366 nm) five fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.47, 0.53 (both  
light blue), 0.62 (bluish pink), 0.74 (blue) and 0.85 (light green). On exposure to Iodine  
vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.14, 0.28, 0.47, 0.53, 0.74, 0.85 and 0.92 (all yellow).  
On spraying with 5% Methanolic Phosphomolybdic acid reagent and heating the plate  
for ten minutes at 110 °C four spots appear at Rf. 0.47, 0.74, 0.85 and 0.92 (all bluish  
grey). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Bitter Substances, Sterols, Glycosides and Glyco-Alkaloids.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya:AnuÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Rucya, Tridosahara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Am¤t¡riÀ¶a, Da¿m£l¡riÀ¶a, Bh¡rang¢ Gu·a,  
Indu K¡nta Gh¤ta, Dh¡nvantari Taila, Da¿am
£la Kv¡tha C£r¸a.
THERAPEUTIC USES - áv¡sa, áotha, Ar¿a, Chardi, Hikk¡, T¤À¡, Amlapitta,  
Rakta Vik¡ra, M£travikara, Agnidadha, Vra¸a Ruja,  
Vispho¶a, Medoroga
DOSE - 5-10 g. (Powder)
             25-50 ml. (Decoction).
 149 67. Phalgu (Frt.) 
PHALGU (Fruit) 
Phalgu consists of dried fruits of  Ficus hispida  Linn. f. (Fam. Moraceae); a  
moderate sized tree or shrub, distributed throughout the outer Himalayan range from  
Chenab eastwards to Bengal, Central and South India and Andaman Islands. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:K¡kodumbur, Malayu, Malpu
Assam.:Khoskadumar, Tanvardi, Teenbarree
Beng.:Kakdumur, Kathdumur, Kakadumbar
Eng.:Wild Fig, Devil Fig
Guj.:Tedumbaro, Dhedadambaro, Dhedhumbro
Hindi.:Konea-dumbar, Kathumar
Kan.:Kadaatti, Arjeeru Hamu, Anjeeru, Onagida, Hanna, Adane
Kash.:--
Mal.:Peyatti, Kattatti, Erumanakku, Parakasimi
Mar.:Rambal, Kalodumbar, Bhuiumbar
Ori.:Dimiri, Ani Dambura
Punj.:Rumbal
Tam.:Peyatti
Tel.:Brahma medi, Kakimedi
Urdu.:Kath Gular
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Dried syconus fruit, ovoid with a central circular hole and short stalk, 1-2 cm in  
dia., wrinkled; greyish-brown; seeds less than 1 mm in dia. and yellowish-brown in  
colour, odour and taste not characteristic. ' 
b)  Microscopic:
Fruit shows a sinlge layered epidermis, covered with thick cuticle having a few  
unicellular trichomes, epidermis, followed by 4-6 layers of hexagonal to polygonal,  
collenchymatous cells, a few cells contain rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; mesocarp  
composed of large, oval to polygonal, thick-walled parenchymatous cells, a few vascular  
vessels showing spiral thickening. 
Powder  -  Greyish-brown;  shows  groups  of  oval  to  polygonal,  thin-walled  cells  of  
mesocarp  and  endosperm,  fragments  of  polyhedral,  thick-walled  epidermal  cells  in  
surface view, spiral vessels and abundant unicellular trichomes. 
 150 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than13Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 12Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol :  
Acetic acid: water (4:1:5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf 0.36  
and 0.92 (both blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour four spots appear at Rf. 0.20, 0.36,  
0.41 and 0.92 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and  
heating the plate for ten minutes at 105 °C two spots appear at Rf. 0.20 (grey) and 0.92  
(brown). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannins and Saponins, 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Gr¡h¢,  Kaphahara,  V¡tahara  Pittahara,  M¡nsakara,  áukrakara,  
Mala Stambhana, T¤ptik¡raka, B¤Æiha¸a, ViÀ¶ambh¢ 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Citrak¡di Taila
THERAPEUTIC USES - Vra¸a, áveta KuÀta, P¡¸·u, Ar¿a,  K¡mal¡, Atis¡ra, D¡ha,  
KÀata, ViÀaroga, Tvakaroga, Raktavik¡ra, Ka¸·u,  
KuÀ¶ha, Sopha, Raktapitta, V¡tapittajaroga
DOSE - 10-20 g.
 151 68. Phalgu (Rt.) 
PHALGU (Root)
Phalgu  consists  of  dried  root  of  Ficus  hispida  Linn.  f.  (Fam.  Moraceae);  a  
moderate sized tree or shrub, distributed throughout the outer Himalayan range from  
Chenab eastwards to Bengal, Central and South India and Andaman Islands. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:K¡kodumbur, Mal¡yu, Malpu
Assam.:Khoskadumar, Tanvardi, Teenbarree
Beng.:Kakdumur, Kathdumur, Kakadumbar
Eng.:Wild Fig, Devil Fig
Guj.:Tedumbaro, Dhedadambaro, Dhedhumbro
Hindi.:Konea-dumbar, Kathumar
Kan.:Kadatti, Arjeeru Hamu, Anjeeru, Onagida, Hanna, Adane
Kash.:--
Mal.:Peyatti, Kattatti, Erumanakku, Parakasimi
Mar.:Rambal, Kalodumbar, Bhuiumbar
Ori.:Dimiri, Ani Dambura
Punj.:Rumbal
Tam.:Peyatti
Tel.:Brahma medi, Kakimedi
Urdu.:Kath Gular
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Roots 4 -17 cm long, 1.0-2.5 cm thick, almost cylindrical, occasionally somewhat  
compressed at places, external surface brown to dark brown with deep, elliptical cracks  
and tangentially arranged rows of lenticels; fracture, splintery. 
b)  Microscopic:
Root shows 5-10 layers of cork, consisting of thin-walled, compressed cells, outer  
layers exfoliating; secondary  cortex a wide zone consisting  of  irregularly arranged,  
tangentially elongated, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, some of which contain rosette  
crystals of calcium oxalate and dark red coloured contents; secondary phloem consisting  
of  usual  elements,  comprising  of  thin-walled  cells;  cellulosic  phloem  fibres  found  
scattered throughout secondary phloem in singles and in groups of 2-3; a few phloem  
parenchyma and phloem ray cells contain rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; secondary  
xylem situated centrally, consisting of usual elements, all being lignified; xylem vessels  
numerous, equally distributed throughout secondary xylem region, in singles as well as  
in groups of 2-6, xylem rays numerous, straight and 1-5 cells wide. 
 152 Powder - Yellowish-brown; shows cellulosic phloem fibres, xylem vessels in broken  
pieces with pitted thickenings and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9 : 1) on exposure to Iodine vapour shows six spots at Rf. 0.05, 0.15, 0.30, 0.34, 0.92  
and 0.98 (all yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent followed by 5% aqueous  
Sodium Nitrite solution four spots appear at Rf. 0.30, 0.34, 0.92 and 0.98 (all light  
brown). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :á¢ta, Guru 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, Malastambhaka 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Mah¡pancagavya Gh¤ta
THERAPEUTIC USES - ávitra, Ka¸·u, KuÀ¶ha, Vra¸a, Raktapitta, áopha, P¡¸·u,  
Raktavik¡ra, K¡mal¡, Ar¿a.
DOSE - 1-3 g. of the drug in powder form. 
 153 69. Prapunnada (Sd.) 
PRAPUNNËÚA (Seed)
Prapunn¡·a  consists  of  dried  seed  of  Cassia  tora  Linn.  (Fam.  Fabaceae);  a  
herbaceous annual occurring as a weed throughout the country in plains, ascending 1500  
m in the Central Himalayas. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:E·agaja, Dadrughna
Assam.:Kulb
Beng.:Chavuka, Chakunda, Panevar
Eng.:Ring Worm Plant, Fetid Cassia
Guj.:Kovaraya
Hindi.:Pavand
Kan.:Tagache
Kash.:--
Mal.:Tagaraa
Mar.:Tankala
Ori.:--
Punj.:Panwal, Chakunda, Chakwad
Tam.:Vshittgarai
Tel.:Tagiris
Urdu.:Panwar
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Seed hard, 1 cm long, 3-4 mm thick, oblong or rhombohedral, both ends appear as  
if cut off obliquely, greenish-brown to brownish-black, smooth and shiny; odourless;  
taste, bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Seed shows seed coat consisting of longitudinally elongated cells, covered with  
thick, smooth cuticle, followed by palisade layer composed of closely packed, radially  
arranged, non-lignified, thickened columnar cells, and by a single layer of dumb-bell  
shaped,  thick-walled,  parenchymatous  cells;  a  wide  zone  of  thick-walled,  
parenchymatous cells forming inner layer of testa present, differentiated into outer 8 - 10  
layers of tangentially elongated, parenchymatous cells and a single layer of broad cells  
which are squarish in shape; a few vascular bundles scattered in this zone; embryo  
consists of radicle, plumule and two cotyledons; epidermis of cotyledon consists of a  
single layer, externally covered with cuticle, followed by two layers of palisade-like  
cells of mesophyll; mesophyll of ventral side composed of rectangular to polygonal cells  
filled with round to oval starch grain, measuring 8-12 µ in dia., a few vascular bundles  
and a few rosette crystals of calciuhrolllalate upto 49 µ in dia.; scattered in this region. 
 154 Powder -  Light brown; shows fragments of testa, parenchymatous cells, very small,  
numerom: simple, round to oval, starch grains measuring 8-12 µ in dia., and a few rosette  
crystals of calcium oxalate upto 49 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 14Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4:1:5) shows in visible light three spots at Rf 0.33, 0.47 and 0.57 (all light  
yellow). Under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.33 (blue), 0.47  
(light pink) and 0.57 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf.  
0.27, 0.33, 0.47,0.57, 0,62, 0.71 and 0.82 (all yellow). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Anthraquinones, Fixed OiL 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Recana,  Kaphav¡ta¿¡maka  K¤mighna,  Lekhana,  KuÀ¶haghnama  
ViÀaghana Tvaka, Var¸apras¡dakaram, Tvacya. 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Nimb¡di C£r¸a, K¡s¢s¡di Gh¤ta, Mah¡  
ViÀagarbha Taila, B¤hanmariy¡di Taila.
THERAPEUTIC USES - Kaphav¡tajanya Vik¡ra, KuÀ¶ha, Vra¸a Vik¡ra, Dadru,  
PakÀ¡gh¡ta, Vibhandha, Gulma, K¤mi, P¡m¡, Ka¸·u, áv¡sa,  
K¡sa.
DOSE - 1-3 g. of powder, 
 155 70. Raktachandana (Ht.Wd.)
RAKTACANDANA (Heart Wood)
Raktacandana consists of heart wood of  Pterocarpus santalinus  Linn. f. (Fam. 
Fabaceae); a medium sized, deciduous tree upto 10-11 m high and 1.5 m in girth, mostly  
found in Andhra Pradesh and neighbouring area of Chennai and Karnataka at an altitude  
of 150-900 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Rakt¡nga, KÀudracndana, Rakta¿ara
Assam.:Sandale, Sandal Ahmar
Beng.:Raktachandana
Eng.:Red Sanders, Red Sandal Wood
Guj.:Ratanjali, Lalchandan
Hindi.:Raktachandanam, Lalchandana
Kan.:Raktha Chandanam
Kash.:--
Mal.:Rakta Chandanam
Mar.:Rakta Chandana
Ori.:--
Punj.:Lal Chandan
Tam.:Senchandanam
Tel.:Erra Chandanamu
Urdu.:Sandal Surkh
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug occurs as irregular pieces, deep blood-red to dark purplish-red or almost  
black, hard, but can be easily split, odourless; taste, slightly astringent.
b)  Microscopic:
Heart wood shows alternating bands of darker and lighter zones; vessels large,  
mostly isolated and connected by fine, bright red rays, consisting of xylem parenchyma;  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate occur in a few celIs; red colouring matter present in  
a  number  of  cells  of  vessels  and  other  cells;  fibres  abundant;  xylem  rays  mostly  
uniseriate.
Powder - Red or purplish-red; shows a number of fibres, vessels and xylem parenchyma  
cells and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. 
 156 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Identification -
Fluorescence test on aqueous and alcoholic extracts :-
i)  5 g. powder extracted in 100 ml of water and filtered shows in day light - pale yellow  
to brownish-red colour; under U.V. light (366 nm) emerald green, and under U.V.  
light (254 nm) light green.
ii) 5 g. powder extracted in 100 ml of alcohol and filtered shows in day light brownish - 
redcolour; under U.V. light (366 nm) reddish -brown, and under U.V. light (254)  
yellowish-green colour. 
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9:1) shows in visible light a spot at Rf. 0.37 (light pink). Under U.V. (366 nm) five  
fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.07 (blue), 0.13 (grey), 0.3e (blue), 0.37 (grey), and  
0.57 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.13, 0.16,  
0.26, 0.37, 0.43, 0.74 and 0.80 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid  
reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C seven spots appear at Rf. 0.04  
(violet), 0.07, 0.13 (both light violet), 0.37, 0.43 (both violet), 0.74 and 0.80 (both light  
violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycosides, Colouring Matter. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Pittahara, V¤Àya, ViÀaghna, Netraroga 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Candana Bal¡ LakÀ¡di Taila, Candan¡di Lauha
THERAPEUTIC USES - Chardi, T¤À¸¡, RaktadoÀahara, Tvara, Vra¸a
DOSE - 3-6 g. of the drug (powder). 
 157 71. Raktapunarnava (Rt.) 
RAKTAPUNËRNAVA (Root)
Raktapunarnava  consists  of  dried  root  of  Boerhaavia  diffusa  Linn.  (Fam. 
Nyctaginaceae);  a  trailing  herb  with  stout  root  stock  and  many  diffused,  slender,  
prostrate or ascending branches, occurring thought the plains of India. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:á othaghni, Rakta pusp¡
Assam.:Ronga Punarnabha
Beng.:Rakta Punarnava
Eng.:Hog Weed
Guj.:Saturdi
Hindi.:Gadapurna, Lalpunarnava
Kan.:Kommeberu
Kash.:--
Mal.:Chuvanna Tazhutama
Mar.:Rakta Punarnava
Ori.:Laalapuiruni
Punj.:Iteit (Lal), Khattan
Tam.:Mookarattai (Shihappu)
Tel.:Atikamamidi, Erragalijeru
Urdu.:Surkh Punarnava
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root well developed, fairly long, somewhat tortuous, cylindrical, 0.2 - 1.5 cm in  
dia.; yellowish-brown to brown; surface, rough due to minute longitudinal striations and  
root scars; fracture, short; odour, not distinct; taste, slightly bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature root shows anomalous growth; cork composed of thin-walled, tangentially  
elongated cells in the outer few layers; cork cambium 1-2 layers of thin-walled cells;  
secondary cortex consists of 2-3 layers of parenchymatous cells, followed by cortex  
composed of 5-12 layers of thin-walled, oval to polygonal cells; several concentric bands  
of xylem tissue, alternating with zone of parenchymatous tissue, present below cortical  
region; number of bands vary according to thickness of root and consist of vessels,  
tracheids and fibres; vessels mostly found in groups of 2-8 in radial rows, having simple  
pits and reticulate thickening; tracheids, thick-walled with simple pits; fibres aseptate,  
elongated, thick-walled with pointed ends; phloem occurs as hemispherical or crescent  
patches  outside  each  group  of  xylem  vessels  and  composed  of  sieve  elements  and  
parenchyma; a broad zone of parenchymatous tissue, in between two successive rings of  
xylem elements, composed of thin-walled, more or less rectangular cells arranged in  
 158 radial rows; central region of root occupied by primary vascular bundles; numerous  
raphides in single or in group present in cortical region and in parenchymatous and  
xylem tissue; starch grains simple and compound, having 2-4 components, found in  
abundance in most of the cells of cortex and xylem elements; simple starch grains mostly  
round in shape, measuring 2.75-11 µ in dia.
Powder - Light yellow; shows vessels with reticulate thickening or simple pits, fibres,  
fragments of cork cells, raphides of calcium oxalate and simple, rounded, starch grains,  
measuring 2.75 - 11 µ in dia., and compound starch grains having 2-4 components. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Chloroform  :  
Methanol (8 : 2) shows under UV (366 nm) six fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.11, 0.38 (both  
blue), 0.70, 0.84 (both light blue), 0.90 (light pink) and 0.94 (light blue). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.11, 0.28, 0.38, 0.43, 0.84 and 0.94 (all  
yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent followed by 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric  
acid reagent two spots appear at Rf. 0.08 and 0.94 (both orange). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloid, Hentriacontane, β-Sitosterol, Ursolic Acid.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :á¢ta, Laghu, RukÀa, Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :áophaharra, D¢pana, V¡takara, Kaphaghna, Pittahara. 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Kumary¡sava, D¡dhika Gh¤ta, Dh¡nvantara  
Gh¤ta, Punarnav¡dyariÀ¶a
THERAPEUTIC USES - áopha, P¡¸·u, H¤droga, K¡sa, Ar¿a, Vra¸a, UrahkÀata¿
£la, áotha.
DOSE - 1-3 g. of powder. 
             10-20 ml. (Fresh Juice).
 159 72. Ramashtalika (W.P.) 
RËMAáITALIKË (Whole Plant)
R¡ma¿italik¡ consists dried whole plant of  Amaranthus tricolor  Linn.; Syn.  A. 
gangeticus Linn.; A. melancholicus Linn. A. polygamus Linn. Hook. f., A. tristis Linn.; 
(Fam.  Amaranthaceae),  an  erect,  diffuse,  stout,  annual  herb,  found  throughout  the  
country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:M¡riÀarakta, Ër¡ma¿¢talik¡
Assam.:--
Beng.:Lal Shak
Eng.:--
Guj.:Tandaljo (Lal)
Hindi.:Lal Marsa
Kan.:Dantu, Harave Soppu, Dantina Soppu, Chikkarive
Kash.:--
Mal.:Aramaseetalam
Mar.:Mash
Ori.:--
Punj.:Lal Marsa Sag
Tam.:Mulaikkeerai
Tel.:Erra Tatakura
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root -Tap root, cylindrical, yellowish, 0.3-0.5 cm thick, with a few secondary roots and  
numerous rootlets. 
Stem - Stem cylindrical with longitudinal ridges and furrows, branched, light greenish -
yellow, 0.2-0.4 cm thick; fracture, short. 
Leaf - Leaf simple, 5-12 cm long, 2.5-7 cm wide, very variable in shape, rhomboid-
ovate, lanceolate or deltoid-ovate, obtuse, petiolate, membranous.
Flower - Flowers clustered in the axils and forming a long terminal, more or less  
interrupted spike; bracteole 3 mm long, lanceolate, membranous, perianth 4 mm long;  
sepals 3, white with pinkish tinge, stamens three, anthers dorsifixed.
Seed - Seed 1.5 mm in dia., biconvex, smooth, shiny black.
 160 b)  Microscopic:
Root  - Shows cork consisting of 3-6 rows of thin-walled cells, a few outer layers  
exfoliating; secondary cortex consisting of 6-11 rows of tangentially elongated, tabular,  
thin-walled parenchymatous cells, a few of them containing microsphenoidal crystals of  
calcium oxalate; secondary  phloem  arranged in continuous  ring, consisting  of  thin-
walled cells; phloem parenchyma cells containing microsphenoidal crystals of calcium  
oxalate;  secondary  xylem  arranged  in the form  of  a ring,  beneath  which  there are  
scattered vascular bundles consisting of xylem and phloem; vascular bundles, situated in  
the  centre  are  comparatively  larger;  ground  tissue  consisting  of  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous  cells,  a  few  cells  containing  microsphenoidal  crystals  of  calcium  
oxalate. 
Stem - Shows many thick-walled, oval to polygonal, collenchymatous cells present in  
the ridges seen in outline; epidermis single layered with tabular cells under a thick -
cuticle;  cortex  differentiated  into  3-9  layered,  thick-walled,  tangentially  elongated,  
chlorenchyma cells having a few microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate; vascular  
bundles  collateral  arranged  in  a  concentric  band  consisting  of  phloem  and  xylem  
elements; inside the band, in the ground tissue a number of conjoint vascular bundles  
found scattered; ground tissue consisting of oval or round, thin-walled, parenchymatous  
cells, these cells are smaller toward periphery and larger towards centre, a few of these  
cells contain microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate. 
Leaf-
Petiole  -  Shows  two  notches  which  are  lateral  in  position,  epidermis  single  layer,  
followed by, 1 or 2 layers ventrally and 1 to 7 layers dorsally of collenchyma; rest of the  
cortex  consisting  of  thin-walled  parenchymatous  cells,  a  few  of  them  containing  
microsphenoidal  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  vascular  bundles  arc-shaped  in  three  
separate patches, elongated in the notches central one nearly circular, each consisting of  
xylem and phloem.
Midrib  -  Shows single layered epidermis on both surfaces, followed by 1-2 layered  
collenchyma; rest of the cortex consisting of thin-walled, parenchymatous cells a few of  
them containing rnicrosphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate; vascular bundles 4 in  
number in basal region and single in number towards apical region. 
Lamina - Shows single layered epidermis on both surfaces; upper epidermal cells, thin -
walled, oval to polygonal, with a few uni-to bicellular pointed hairs, sinuous walls and a  
few stomata in surface view; lower epidermal cells composed of thin-walled cells oval  
to  polygonal,  having  a  number  of  rosette  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate  and  a  few  
microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate; walls sinuous, stomata both anomocytic  
and anisocytic type; palisade parenchyma 2 or 3 layered; spongy parenchyma 3 or 4  
layered consisting of circular, irregularly arranged cells
 161 Powder  -Light  green;  shows  lignified  vessels  with  spiral  thickening,  rosette  and  
microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate, fragments of irregular, sinuous, polyhedral,  
thin-walled,  parenchymatous  epidermal  cells  and  palisade  cells,  anomocytic  and  
anisocytic type of stomata. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than17Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than2.6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 17Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic  extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9: 1) shows -under U.V. (366nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.05, 0.17, 0.34 and 0.40  
(all pink). On exposure to Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.17, 0.34, 0.40, 0.56  
and 0.98 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Phosphomolybdic acid reagent  
and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes three spots appear at Rf. 0.17, 0.56 and  
0.98 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Fatty Oils, Sitosterol, Calcium and Magnesium.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Kincit Guru, RukÀa, Sara 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Pittahara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Candrakal¡ Rasa
THERAPEUTIC USES - D¡ha, áoÀa, Vispho¶a, Vra¸a
DOSE - 10-20 ml of the drug in juice form.
 162 73. Rasna (Lf.) 
RËSNË (Leaf)
R¡sn¡  consists  of  dried  leaf  of  Pluchea  lanceolata  Oliver  &  Hiern.(Fam. 
Asteraceae);  an  annual,  ashy  and  pubescent,  undershrub  having  spreading  roots  
extending to several metres; it grows abundantly in sandy soils in upper Gangetic plain  
and Rajasthan. It flowers during cold season. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Suvah¡, Sugandh¡,Yukt¡
Assam.:Rasnapat
Beng.:Rasna
Eng.:--
Guj.:--
Hindi.:Rayasan, Rayasana, Rasna
Kan.:Rasna, Dumme-Rasna
Kash.:--
Mal.:--
Mar.:Rasna, Rayasana
Ori.:--
Punj.:Reshae
Tam.:--
Tel.:Sanna Rashtramu
Urdu.:Rauasan, Rasna
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Leaves simple, 3-5 cm long, 0.6-2 cm broad; sessile, obtuse, lanceolate to ovate-  
lanceolate; margin entire or toothed around the apex, unequal at base; both surfaces  
pubescent, distinct small hairs more prominent near veins; texture, brittle, papery; odour,  
characteristic; taste, astringent and slightly bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Leaf- 
Midrib - shows single layered epidermis covered by thick, striated cuticle; collenchyma  
2-5 layered towards xylem, 1-3 layered towards phloem; beneath collenchyma 2-5 layers  
of  parenchyma  present  on  both  sides;  central portion  occupied  by  a large vascular  
bundle, xylem facing towards upper  and phloem towards lower epidermis; vascular  
bundle surrounded by sclerenchymatous sheath appearing as a cap above and below;  
vascular bundle consists of wide phloem, a thin cambium and xylem; phloem consists of  
phloem parenchyma and a few phloem fibres; xylem consists of tracheids, vessels and  
xylem parenchyma; vessels arranged radially; parenchyma and palisade cells of leaf  
contain oil globules, scattered rosette crystals of calcium oxalate are both in lamina and  
midrib. 
 163 Lamina  -  shows  isobilateral  structure  with  palisade  occurring  in  upper  and  lower  
mesophyll regions; epidermal cells tangentially elongated, covered by thick, striated  
cuticle;  uniseriate,  unbranched  covering  trichomes  2-3  cells  long,  present  on  both  
surfaces, basal cell short and slightly swollen, apical cells long; stomata, anisocytic and  
anomocytic present on both surfaces but more on lower surface; palisade tissue 2 or 3  
layered  on  both  sides,  composed  of  radially  elongated,  thin-walled  cells;  spongy  
parenchyma  composed  of  thin-walled,  circular  to  elliptical,  parenchymatous  cells  
containing abundant chloroplasts with prominent intercellular spaces; a number of small  
veins, surrounded by a sclerenchymatous sheath present in mesophyll; vascular tissue  
much reduced and represented by a few phloem and xylem elements; average value of  
stomatal index on upper surface 14-24 and on lower surface 20-24; palisade ratio not  
more than 5; average value of vein islet number 27. 
Powder - Light green; shows fragments of parenchyma, palisade cells, pointed 2-5 celled  
trichomes, a few oil globules and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than 2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than 22Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 23Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4:1:5) shows in visible light three spots at Rf. 0.37, 0.71 and 0.82 (all grey).  
Under U.V. (366 nm) three fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.27, 0.71 and 0.82 (all  
dark brown). On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at . Rf. 0.08, 0.37, 0.62,  
0.67, 0.71, 0.82 and 0.92 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid  
reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at 110 °C eight spots appear at Rf.  
0.08 (greyish brown), 0.17 (violet), 0.37 (brown), 0.62 (violet), 0.67, 0.71, 0.82 (all  
greyish brown) and 0.92 (violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Flavonoids - Quercetin and Isorhamnetin. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Ëmap¡cana, Kaphav¡tahara 
 
 164 IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Da¿am£l¡riÀ¶a, Devad¡rv¡riÀ¶a, K¡rp¡s¡sthy¡di  
Taila, R¡sn¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a, R¡snaairn·¡di  
Kv¡tha C£r¸a.
THERAPEUTIC USES - áotha, V¡tavy¡dhi, áv¡sa, K¡sa, Jvara, Udararoga, Sidhma,  
Ë·hyav¡ta, Ëmav¡ta, V¡tarakta
DOSE - 25-50 g. (Decoction).
 165 74. Sachachara (W.P.)
SAHACARA (Whole Plant) 
Sahacara  consists  of  dried  whole  plant  of  Barleria  prionitis  Linn.(Fam. 
Acanthaceae); a bushy, prickly undershrub, 0.6-1.5 m high, found throughout hotter  
parts of the country and also cultivated as a hedge plant. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Kuran¶aka, Koran·a, Keran·aka
Assam.:Shinti
Beng.:--
Eng.:--
Guj.:Kanta-Saerio, Kantasalio
Hindi.:Sahacara
Kan.:Sahacara
Kash.:--
Mal.:Kirimkurunji, Karim Kurunni
Mar.:Koranta, Koranti
Ori.:Dasakeranda
Punj.:Sahacar
Tam.:Sammulli
Tel.:Mulu Gorinta Chettu
Urdu.:Pila Bansa, Piya Bansa
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root - Well developed, upto 1 cm thick at the top, cylindrical and tapering, bearing  
lateral branches and numerous rootlets; surface rough due to numerous dot-like lenticels  
and root scars of fallen roots; external surface greyish-brown, bark thin with smooth  
internal surface; wood cream coloured; fracture, hard and laminated; odour and taste not  
characteristic. 
Stem - Erect, 1-8 mm thick, terete, hard, glabrous, nodes swollen, branching at nodes,  
young stem grey, slightly four angled, usually with 3-4 divaricate spines at axil of leaf;  
mature  stem  cylindrical  with  longitudinally  arranged  or  scattered  dot-like  lenticels;  
externally greyish to light brown; a few mature stem slightly hollow.
Leaf - Dorsiventral, variable in size,6-9.5 cm long, 2.5 - 3.5 cm wide, simple, elliptic,  
acuminate, entire, acute, reticulate, unicostate, glabrous above, glabrous or pubescent  
beneath; petiole short.
Flower -  Sessile, often solitary in the lower  axils.. becoming  spicate above; bracts  
foliaceous, 16 by 4.5 mm, oblong or lanceolate, acute, bristle-tipped, nearly glabrous;  
 166 bracteoles 1.3 cm long, narrowly linear, subulate (almost spinous), bristle-tipped; calyx,  
divided almost to the base, one of the outer sepals rather more than 1.3 cm long, the  
opposite sepal rather less than 1.3 cm long, 3.4 mm broad, both oblong-lanceolate,  
mucronate; the 2 inner sepals 1.5 mm wide and as long as the shorter of the outer ones,  
linear  lanceolate,  mucronate;  corona,  3.2-4.5  cm  long,  yellow,  slightly  pubescent  
outside, glabrous inside, somewhat 2 lipped; upper lip 2 cm long or more, deeply 4  
lobed, the lobes oblong-obovate, round; lower lip oblong-obovate, round, entire; tube 1.9  
- 2.2 cm long; stamens 2 fertile and 2 staminodes; filaments of the fertile stamens  
exserted beyond the corona tube, those of the staminode very short; ovary superior of  
two fused carpels; style, simple, usually long with two stigma. 
Fruit - Capsules, 2-2.5 cm long, ovoid with a long tapering solid beak; 2 seeded. 
Seed- Compressed, 0.8 cm in diameter and clothed with silky appressed hairs. 
b)  Microscopic:
Root - Mature root shows cork of 6-25 layers of thin-walled, tangentially elongated  
cells; cork cambium single layered; secondary cortex composed of large, tangentially  
elongated, parenchymatous cells with small intercellular spaces; secondary phloem  
consists of sieve tubes, companion cells, phloem parenchyma, and traversed by phloem  
rays, phloem fibres found scattered throughout phloem region in single and groups,  
single fibres elongatea, thick-waned with narrow lumen; secondary xylem wide, vessels,  
tracheids, parenchyma, xylem fibres present; vessels, pitted, with transverse to oblique  
articulation; tracheids slightly broader in middle with tapering ends having pitted walls;  
xylem fibres thick-waned, lignified and pitted; xylem parenchyma rectangular with  
lignified walls; xylem rays uni to biseriate, uniseriate rays more common. 
Stem - Cork 6-24 or more layers of rectangular and radially arranged cells; secondary  
cortex composed of thin-waned, tangentially elongated, 8-15 layers of parenchymatous  
cells, filled with brown contents; secondary phloem narrow, consisting of heterogenous  
type of cells; phloem fibres found scattered uniformly throughout phloem region in  
singles or in groups; fibres moderate in length, lignified with pointed tips; secondary  
xylem consists of vessels, tracheids, fibres, xylem parenchyma traversed by xylem rays;  
vessels numerous, vary in size, distributed  throughout  xylem  region  vessels having  
taillike projections at one or both ends and transverse to oblique perforations with spiral  
or pitted thickenings; tracheids pitted having pointed tips; xylem parenchyma mostly  
rectangular,  thick-waned,  lignified  with  simple  pits;  xylem  rays  usually  uniseriate,  
occasionally biseriate; pith isodiametric of parenchymatous cells most of which contain  
single or group of acicular crystals of calcium oxalate, measuring 19-28 µ in length and 
3 µ in width. 
Leaf -
Petiole  -  A single layered upper and lower epidermis covered externally with a thick  
cuticle, a few epidermal cells elongate to form unicellular hairs,cystolith develops in  
 167 some epidermal cells; 2-6 layers of collenchymatous cells present in both upper and  
lower epidermis; parenchyma 3-8 layered in upper surface and 7-10 layered in lower  
surface towards proximal end and 5-7 layered at distal end, circular to polygonal and  
thin-walled;  some  contain  raphides  of  calcium  oxalate;  vascular  bundle  semilunar,  
situated centrally in parenchymatous ground tissue; xylem vessels arranged in radial  
rows, protoxylem towards centre; two smaller vascular bundles present on either sides  
of central vascular bundle. 
Midrib - Single layered epidermis on both surfaces covered externally with thick cuticle;  
collenchyma  2-5  layered  on  both  surfaces,  followed  by  3-6  layers,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells; vascular bundle single, crescent-shaped having usual elements. 
Lamina Single layered epidermis covered with thick cuticle on both surfaces, glandular  
trichomes present on both surfaces, while the non-glandular, unicellular, elongated with  
pointed tips, present only on lower surface; palisade single layered; spongy parenchyma  
thin-walled, irregular in shape; stomata diacytic and present on both surfaces but more  
abundant on lower surface; a few veins present in this region. 
Powder -  Green;  shows  fragments  of  cork,  xylem  vessels  with  spiral  and  pitted  
thickening, acicular crystals of calcium oxalate, measuring 19-28 µ in length and 3 µ in 
width, fibres, fragments of lamina of leaf with palisade and mesophyll cells; glandular  
and non-glandular hairs, epidermal cells with diacytic stomata. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid': Water (4:1:5) shows four spots at Rf. 0.57, 0.77, 0.91 and 0.94 (all light yellow) in  
the visible "light. Under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.57,  
0.77, 0.91 (all blue) and 0.94 (black). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at  
Rf. 0.18, 0.43, 0.57, 0.77, 0.88 and 0.94 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-
Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 ° C for ten minutes five spots appear  
at Rf. 0.57 (yellow), 0.77, 0.88 (both pink), 0.84 and 0.94 (both violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids, β-Sitosterol, Potassium. 
 168 PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Ke¿ya, K¡sa, Ranjana, ViÀahara. 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Sahacar¡di Taila, N¢lik¡dya Taila, AÀ¶avarga  
Kv¡tha C£r¸a, Rasn¡ran·¡di Kv¡tha Cur¸a.
THERAPEUTIC USES - KuÀ¶ha, Ka¸·u, V¡tarakta, Palit.
DOSE - 50-100 g. of the drug for decoction.
 169 75. Sahadevi (W.P.)
SAHADEVI (Whole Plant)  
Sahadevi  consists  of  dried  whole  plant  of  Vernonia  cinerea  Lees.  (Fam. 
Asteraceae);  an  erect,  rarely  decumbent,  branched  herb,  12-75  cm  high,  found  
throughout India ascending to an altitude of 1800 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Uttamkanyaka, Da¸·otpal¡
Assam.:Schdevi
Beng.:Kuksim
Eng.:Purple Fleabane, Fleabane
Guj.:Sadoree, Sadodee
Hindi.:Sahadevi
Kan.:Sahadevee, Okarchendhi
Kash.:--
Mal.:Poovan Kuruntala, Mukkuthaipo
Mar.:Sadodee, Sahdevee
Ori.:--
Punj.:Sehdei
Tam.:Naichotte Poonde
Tel.:Garita Kammi, Sehadevi
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root - 5-12 cm long, 1-7 mm thick, oblique and gradually tapering, bearing a few  
rootlets; external surface, dirty brown; fracture, short. 
Stem - Glabrous, cylindrical, hairy, slightly branched; 10-17 cm long, 1-8 mm thick,  
grooved and ribbed; basal region of branches greenish-brown, apical region dark green,  
bearing a number of flowers; fracture, short. 
Leaf -  Simple,  dark-green,  smooth,  alternate,  opposite,  exstipulate,  2.5-5  cm  long,  
1.8-3.6  cm  broad,  elliptical,  lanceolate,  obtuse  or  acutely  toothed;  shape  and  size  
variable; petiole short; odour, slightly characteristic. 
b)  Microscopic:
Root - Mature root shows 4-5 layered cork, consisting of tabular, tangentially elongated,  
thick-walled cells filled with reddish-brown contents; secondary cortex consists of a  
wide zone of thin-walled, parenchymatous cells having a few resin ducts; secondary  
phloem, a narrow zone, composed of sieve elements and phloem parenchyma, traversed  
by  phloem  rays;  xylem  well-developed,  composed  of  vessels,  tracheids,  fibres  and  
 170 xylem parenchyma, traversed by 1-5 seriate xylem rays; xylem vessels usually solitary  
or 2-4 in groups with reticulate thickening; fibres aseptate and pointed. 
Stem  - Mature stem shows several bulges at places and consists of a single layered  
epidermis,  externally  covered  with  a  striated  cuticle;  a  number  of  epidermal  cells  
elongate to form multicellular covering and T-shaped trichomes with 2-6 celled stalk;  
cortex 3-5 layers of thin-walled, tangentially elongated parenchymatous cells, a few  
filled with reddishbrown content, bulges show a few layers of collenchyma between  
epidermis and parenzhymatous cortex; endodermis single layered, composed of barrel-
shaped cells; pericycle occurs in the form of groups of pericyclic fibres; phloem consists  
of strands of sieve tubes, companion cells and phloem parenchyma; xylem consists of  
vessel, parenchyma and fibres; xylem vessls show reticulate thickening; parenchyma in  
abundance  and  paratracheal;  fibres  thick-walled,  aseptate,  short,  with  pointed  ends;  
medullary rays 2-11 cells wide; central portion occupied by pith composed of hexagonal  
to polygonal, thin-walled parenchymatous cells; a few simple starch grains present in  
cortical cells; cluster crystals of calcium oxalate occasionally found in pith. 
Leaf -
Petiole  - shows a somewhat circular outline with two lateral projections one on each  
side; epidermis on both surfaces, covered externally with striated cuticle and have both  
type of trichomes as described in case of stem, followed by 2-3 layers of collenchyma on  
upper and lower side; stele composed of three collateral vascular bundles located in  
centre, central one larger and lateral two smaller; ground tissue composed of thin-walled  
parenchymatous cells, a few having oil globules and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate. 
Midrib  - shows similar structure as described in petiole except for 1 or 2 layers of  
collenchymatous cells below both epidermis and a single vascular bundle in centre; oil  
globules and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate present in a few cells of ground tissue. 
Lamina  -  shows  dorsiventral  structure;  epidermis  single  layered  on  either  surface,  
composed of thin-walled, tangentially elongated cells, covered externally with striated  
cuticle; trichomes similar to those of stem; palisade single layered; spongy parenchyma  
4-5 layered, loosely arranged cells; vascular bundles embedded in spongy parenchyma;  
rosette crystals of calcium oxalate and oil globules present in this region; anomocytic  
stomata present on both surfaces. 
Powder  - Greenish-brown; shows reticulate vessels, thick-walled fibres, a few rosette  
crystals of calcium oxalate, multicullular covering and T -shaped trichomes with 2-6  
celled stalk, and epidermal cells irregular in shape in surface view, showing anomocytic  
stomata.
 171 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than14Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 15Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(95 : 5) shows on exposure to Iodine vapour two spots at Rf. 0.55 and 0.96 (both  
yellowish brown), On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating  
the plate for about ten minutes at 110 °C three spots appear at Rf. 0.40, 0.55 and 0.96 (all  
violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Saponins, Sapogenins, Flavonoids.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :áothahara, Kaphav¡ta¿¡maka, ávaraghna, Nidr¡kar¡ 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Candrakal¡ Rasa, Alamott¡di KaÀh¡yam (S.Y.)
THERAPEUTIC USES - Jvara, ViÀamajvara, Sidhma, Visphota, Bh£tab¡dh¡,  
Grahab¡dh¡, Spho¶aka, Pradara, ál¢pada
DOSE - 10-20 ml. (Swarasa). 
               5-10 g. (Powder for external use only).
 172 76. Shaileya (Lichen) 
áAILEYA (Lichen)
áaileya consists of the whole thallus of Parmelia perlata (Huds.) Ach. (Fam. 
Parmeliaceae), a perennial lichen found on rocks or dead wood in temperate Himalayas. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:á¢ta¿iva, áil¡puÀpa
Assam.:--
Beng.:Shailaj
Eng.:Stone Flower, Rock Moss
Guj.:Patthar Phool, Chhadilo
Hindi.:Charela, Chharila, Chhadila
Kan.:Shilapushpa, Kalluhoo
Kash.:--
Mal.:Sheleyam, Kalppuvu
Mar.:Dagad phool
Ori.:--
Punj.:Ausneh, Chhadila
Tam.:Kalpashee
Tel.:Ratipuvvu
Urdu.:Chhadila
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Thallus consists of a flattened, foliose structure with a more or less deeply incised  
upper surface, yellowish-white on top and black on the lower surface, leathery to touch;  
delicate rhizoids arise from lower surface; odour and taste not distinct; bud-like bodies  
known as soredia are also present on the upper surface of the thallus. 
b)  Microscopic:
Thallus shows upper cortex consisting of compact hyphae of fungus, followed by  
gonidial layers with algal cells; medulla consisting of loosely arranged mass of fungal  
hyphal tissue; lower cortex black, consisting of compact mass of fungal hyphae; a few  
asci with ascospores embedded in the upper portion of the thallus; thallus on soaking in  
water gives orange colour. 
Powder - Brown, shows fungal hyphae, gonidia, compact mass of cortex and spores, and  
algal cells. 
 173 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than9Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4: 1 : 5) shows in visible light four spots at Rf. 0.11, 0.28, 0.40, 0.91. (all  
grey). Under U.V. (366 nm) six fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.11(dark blue), 0.28  
(dark blue), 0.40, 0.61 (both blue), 0.83 (dirty yellow) and 0.91 (light yellow). On  
exposure to Iodine vapour six appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.28, 0.40, 0.61, 0.83 and 0.91 (all  
yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and on heating the  
plate for ten minutes at 105 °C six spots appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.28, 0.40, 0.61, 0.83 and  
0.91 (all grey) .. 
CONSTITUENTS  - Lichen acids - Atranorin and Lecanoric acid.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :H¤dya, Pittahara., Rucya, Stambhaka, Kaphapitthara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - V¡s¡candan¡di Taila, J¢rak¡di Modaka, Saubh¡gya  
áu¸¶h¢, Candan¡di  Taila,  Dh¡nvantara Taila,  
N¡r¡ya¸a Taila,  Mah¡n¡r¡yana Taila, T¡rkÀya  
Gu·a, Agarvadya Taila, áailey¡di Taila, M
¤tasanjivan¢ Sur¡, Dnjana Va¶i.
THERAPEUTIC USES - Ka¸·u, KuÀ¶ha, A¿mar¢, D¡ha, ViÀa, H¤ll¡sa, T¤À¸¡, Vra¸a, H
¤dayaroga, Rakta Vik¡ra, áv¡sa, Jvara, M£trak¤chra, M
£tragh¡ta, áriah á£la.
DOSE - 1-3 g.
 174 77. Shaka (Ht.Wd.)
áËKA (Heart Wood)
á¡ka consists of dried heart wood of Tectona grandis Linn. f. (Fam Verbenaceae);  
a large deciduous tree found in peninsular region and Madhya Pradesh extending to parts  
of Rajasthan, Southern Uttar Pradesh and Orissa, and also in plantations. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Bh£misaha, Dw¡rad¡ru, Kharacchada
Assam.:Chingjagu Sagun
Beng.:Segunagachh
Eng.:Indian Teak
Guj.:Sagwan, Sag, Saga
Hindi.:Sagwan, Sagauna, Sagu
Kan.:Tegu, Sagawani, Thega
Kash.:--
Mal.:Thekku
Mar.:Sagwan
Ori.:Saguana, Sagan, Sagun
Punj.:Sagwan
Tam.:Tekku
Tel.:Teku, Pedda
Urdu.:Sagwan
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug available in pieces of varying length and thickness, moderately hard, ring  
porous, texture, coarse, light brown to golden brown in colour; odour, characteristic. 
b)  Microscopic:
Heart wood  shows  well  developed  xylem, consisting  of  vessels,  parenchyma,  
fibres and medullary rays; vessels solitary or 2-4 in groups, arranged in radial rows, a  
few having tyloses;  medullary rays multiseriate, thin-walled, oval to elongated, 2-4  
celled wide. 
Powder - Light brown; shows simple pitted vessels, a few with tyloses, aseptate fibres  
with pointed ends and parenchymatous cells. 
 175 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9: 1) shows in visible light five spots at Rf. 0.08 (pink), 0.31 (pink), 0.37 (pink) 0.81  
(light yellow), and 0.92 (light yellow). Under U.V. (366 nm) five fluorescent zones are  
visible at Rf. 0.08, 0.31, 0.71, 0.81 and 0.92 (all grey). On exposure to Iodine vapour ten  
spots appear at Rf. 0.03, 0.05, 0.08, 0.31, 0.37, 0.48, 0.64, 0.71, 0.81 and 0.92 (all  
yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for  
about ten minutes at 110 °C seven spots appear at Rf. 0.03, 0.05, 0.08, 0.31, 0.48, 0.71  
and 0.92 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Resin, Essential Oil, Fatty Oil and Tectoquinone. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, Raktapras¡dana, Garbhasthairyakara. 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Ayask¤ti
THERAPEUTIC USES - KuÀ¶ha, Raktapitta, M£traroga, P¡¸·u, Prameha,  
Medoroga, D¡ha, árama, T¤À¸¡, K¤miroga, Garbhasr¡va, Garbhap¡tana.
DOSE - 3 - 6 g. of the drug in powder form. 
               30 - 60 g. of the drug for decoction.
 176 78. Shakhotaka (St.Bk)
áËKHOÙAKA (Stem Bark)
á¡kho¶aka consists of stem bark of  Streblus asper  Lour. (Fam. Moraceae); an  
evergreen, rigid gnarled tree upto 15 m high and 1.5 m in girth, having a bole of 4-7 m  
distributed in the Himalayas from Himachal Pradesh to West Bengal and in hills and  
plains of Assam and Tripura, ascending to an altitude of 450 m; also occurs both in the  
peninsular India upto 600 m, especially in drier parts, and in Andamans. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:á¡kho¶a, P¢taphalaka, Bh£t¡v¡sa, Kharacchada
Assam.:--
Beng.:Sheoda
Eng.:Sand Paper Mulberry
Guj.:Sahoda
Hindi.:Sahora, Sihoda, Sihar
Kan.:Mittlamara
Kash.:--
Mal.:Pirayan, Pirai
Mar.:Sahod, Karvatee
Ori.:Sahod
Punj.:Shebda
Tam.:Pirayan pirai
Tel.:Berrenka, Barninka
Urdu.:Sehoda
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Mature stem bark occurs in channelled pieces; thickness varies from 0.3-1 cm;  
outer surface light grey to silvery brown with faint ridges and a number of lenticels  
making the surface quite rough; inner surface smooth and brownish in colour; fracture,  
tough, brittle on the outer portion and fibrous in the inner portion; no taste and odour. 
b)  Microscopic:
Shows  a  cork  consisting  of  4-10  layers  of  thin-walled,  rectangular  and  
tangentially arranged cells; cork cambium single layered; secondary cortex Consists of  
3-4 layers of thin-walled, somewhat rectangular or circular to polygonal cells; a number  
of stone cells present either in singles or in groups in tangential bands; stone cells of two  
types, one having thick-walled and narrow lumen while the other having comparatively  
thinner wall and wider lumen; they vary in shape, being rectangular, oval, circular to  
conical, each with simple pits on their walls and radiating canals; secondary phloem  
consists of sieve elements, parenchyma, phloem fibres and stone cells, traversed by  
phloem rays; phloem parenchyma thin-walled, circular to oval in shape, phloem fibres  
 177 moderately thick-walled and lignified with wide lumen, occurring in singles or in groups  
and radially  arranged;  stone  cells similar to those present in cortical region, occur  
throughout the phloem; phloem rays thin-walled, rectangular and radially elongated in  
transverse section, a few ray cells also converted into stone cells; prismatic crystals of  
calcium oxalate occur throughout the tissues of bark. 
Powder - Light-grey; shows, phloem fibres, thick and thin-walled stone cells and a large  
number of oblique, rectangular, prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than15Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 12Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9: 1) shows under UV (366 nm) six fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.11, 0.18 (both light blue),  
0.28 (pink), 0.36 (blue), 0.41 (pink) and 0.93 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour eight  
spots appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.28, 0.41, 0.52, 0.60, 0.76, 0.86 and 0.93 (all yellow). On  
spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at  
110°C seven spots appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.28 (both light brown), 0.36, 0.41, 0.52, 0.76 (all  
light violet) and 0.93 (dark brown). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycosides, Saponins and Sapogenins.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :áothahara, Medohara, V¡ta¿leÀmahara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - B¤hanmanjiÀ¶h¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a
THERAPEUTIC USES - Raktapitta, Ar¿a, ál¢pada, Apac¢, Prameha, KuÀ¶ha,  
Ga¸·am¡l¡.
DOSE - 1-3 g. (Powder). 
              10-20 g. (for decoction).
 178 79. Shalaparni (Rt.) 
SËLAPARÛÌ (Root)
S¡lapar¸¢ consists of dried root of Desmodium gangeticum DC. (Fam. Fabaceae),  
a nearly erect under shrub, 0.6 -1.2 m high, growing wild almost throughout India in the  
plains and Western Ghats, and upto 1500 m in the north upto Sikkim. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk:Sthir¡, Vid¡rigandh¡, AÆ¿umat¢
Assam:--
Beng:Salparni
Eng:--
Guj:Salwan
Hindi:Sarivan, Salaparni
Kan:Murelchonne
Kash:--
Mal:Moovila
Mar:Salparni, Salwan
Ori:Saloporni
Punj:Shalpurni
Tam:Moovilai
Tel:Kolakuponna. Nakkotokaponna, Kolaponna
Urdu:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Tap root, poorly developed, but lateral roots 15-30 cm long, and 0.1-0.8 cm thick,  
uniformly cylindrical with a number of branches; surface smooth bearing a number of  
transverse,  light  brown  lenticels,  bacterial  nodules  frequently  present;  light  yellow;  
fracture fibrous; odour not characteristic; taste, sweetish and mucilaginous. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature root shows cork, 3-7 layers of thin-walled, tangentially elongated cells,  
having  a  few  prismatic  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  cork  cambium  single  layered;  
secondary cortex 4-10 layers of thin-walled, tangentially elongated cells having a few  
isolated  cortical  fibres;  secondary  phloem  composed  of  parenchyma,  sieve  tubes,  
companion cells and fibres, traversed by phloem rays; sieve tubes collapsed in outer  
region, but intact in inner region; phloem fibres slightly elongated, lignified; phloem  
rays uni to multiseriate, 1-4 cells wide and 4-15 cells high; outer phloem region having  
occasionally prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; cambium 2-3 layers; secondary xylem  
having 1-2 growth rings, consisting of vessels, tracheids, xylem parenchyma, and xylem  
fibres, traversed by xylem rays; vessels, lignified, large, narrow, with both reticulate  
thickening or bordered pits; xylem parenchyma with rectangular or slightly elongated  
 179 cells, resembling those of phloem parenchyma in shape but larger in size and xylem  
fibres resemble those of phloem fibres in shape but larger in size; xylem rays thick-
walled possessing simple pits, 1-5 cells wide and 4-12 cells high; simple, round to oval  
starch grains measuring 7-25 µ in dia. and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate present  
in secondary phloem and secondary xylem. 
Powder  -Light  brown;  shows  fragments  of  rectangular  cork  cells,  vessels  having  
reticulate thickening and bordered pits, xylem fibres, ray cells, prismatic crystals of  
calcium oxalate and simple round to oval starch grains, measuring 7-25 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Chloroform  :  
Methanol (9: 1) shows under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.40, 0.85 and  
0.96 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.40, 0.85 and  
0.96 (all yellow). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya,  TridoÀahara,  V¤Àya,  ViÀahara,  Angamardapra¿amana,  
Sukhaprasavakara,  SarvadoÀahara,  V¡tadoÀajit,  Ras¡yan¢,  
BharaÆhara, Sant¡p¡n¡sin¢ 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Da¿am£l¡riÀ¶a, Induk¡nta Gh¤ta, Am¤tapr¡¿a Gh
¤ta, Da¿am£laÀa¶apalaka Gh¤ta, Dh¡nvantara  
Taila, N¡r¡ya¸a Taila, Mah¡viÀagarbha Taila,  
Mah¡nar¡ya¸a Taila.
 180 THERAPEUTIC USES - Jvara, Meha, Ar¿a, Chardi, áopha, áv¡sa, K¡sahara, K¤mi,  
RajayakÀm¡, Netra Roga, H¤daya Roga, Rakta Gata V¡ta,  
V¡ta Ardhv¡bhedaka, M£·ha Garbha
DOSE - 5 -10g. of the drug in powder form. 
           10-20 g. for decoction.
 181 80. Shali (Frt.) 
SËLÌ (Fruit)
S¡l¢ consists of dried fruit of Oryza sativa Linn.(Fam. Poaceae); an annual herb,  
cultivated throughout India. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Ta¸·ulama, Dh¡nya
Assam.:--
Beng.:Dhan, Chaval, Chanval
Eng.:Rice, Paddy
Guj.:Bhat, Chorya, Chokha
Hindi.:Chaval, Dhan
Kan.:Akkiege, Nellu
Kash.:--
Mal.:Ari
Mar.:Tandul, Sali Bhat
Ori.:--
Punj.:--
Tam.:Arshee, Nellu, Arisi
Tel.:Dhanyamu, Vadlu, Biyyamu
Urdu.:--
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Fruit small, one seeded, caryopsis, about 0.6-1 cm long and 0.2-0.3 cm wide,  
oblong to ovoid, somewhat angular, blunt, sometimes pointed; surface rough due to  
minutes trichomes, faintly longitudinal ridges and furrows, mostly 6 rows, somewhat  
compressed , flattened and tightly enclosed by lemma and palea; yellowish-brown; seed,  
smooth upto 0.6 cm long, oval to oblong, slightly flattened; blunt, oblique, slightly  
angled in embryo region; light creamy to white; odour not characteristic; taste, sweet. 
b)  Microscopic:
Fruit shows wavy irregular outline; pericarp and testa fused together; pericarp  
consists of single layered, thick, lignified sclerenchymatous outer epidermis with clear  
pits, covered by a few thick, blunt, sometimes pointed trichomes and 2-3 layered circular  
to oval fibre, followed by 3-5 layered, tangentially  elongated, thick-walled, tabular  
parenchymatous cells, having a few scattered fibro vascular. bundles and single layered,  
thin,  elongated,  slightly  wavy  inner  epidermal  cells;  testa  consists  of  thin walled, 
elongated, 2-3 layered parenchymatous cells with a interrupted tube cells followed by  
single layered, oval to rectangular, parenchymatous layer containing aleurone grains;  
endosperm  albuminous,  consisting  of  wide,  thin-walled,  elongated  to  polygonal,  
parenchymatous cells packed with numerous, minute, single polyhedral starch grains,  
 182 having, hilum without concentric striations, measuring 3-12 µ in dia., compound starch  
grains 2-150 components; empryo small, lying in a groove at one end of the endosperm,  
separated by a layer of epithelium; empryo consists of a shieldshaped cotyledon known  
as scutellum. 
Powder - Light cream; fragments of elongated thick-walled, lignified sclerenchymatous  
cells, endosperms cells filled with starch grains, parenchymatous cells of endosperm  
filled with granules, small pieces of blunt trichomes; minute, single, polyhedral with  
starch granules having hilum without concentric striations, measuring 3-12 µ in dia., and 
compound starch granules with 2-150 components. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9:1) shows under UV (366 nm) eight fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.11, 0.15, 0.17 (all blue),  
0.21 (green), 0.27 (blue), 0.30 (blue), 0.35 (green) and 0.94 (blue). On spraying with 5%  
Methanolic-Phosphomolybdic acid reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at  
110°C three spots appear at Rf. 0.21,0.30 and 0.94 (all blue). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Carbohydrate -Starch. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Anuras, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :H¤dya,  Pittahara,  Rucikara,  V¤Àya,  ViÀaghna,  Swalpa  V¡takara,  
Svalpa Kapha Kara, M£tral, B¤hamma, Baddhavarcasaka, Svarya. 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - La¿un¡di Gh¤ta, D¡dhik Gh¤ta, Tandulodanam
THERAPEUTIC USES - Jvara, T¤À¸¡, Vra¸a, Atis¡ra, B¡l¡tis¡ra, Pradara.
DOSE - 100 ml. Tandulodaka. 
 183 81. Shalmali (St.Bk.) 
áËLMALI (Stem Bark)
á¡lmali  consists  of  the  mature  stem  bark  of  Bombax  ceiba  Linn.  Syn.  B. 
malabaricum  DC.,  Salmalia  malabarica  Schott.  &  Endl.  (Fam.  Bombacaceae),  a  
deciduous tree attaining a height upto 40 m and a girth upto 6 m or more and distributed  
throughout the hotter parts of the country upto 1500 m or more. 
SYNONYMS-
Sansk.:Moca, Picchila, RaktapuÀpa, Ka¸¶ak¡dhya, T£lin¢
Assam.:Semul
Beng.:Shimul, Simul
Eng.:Silk-Cotton Tree
Guj.:Shemalo
Hindi.:Semal, Semar
Kan.:Kempuburunga
Kash.:---
Mal.:Mullilavu
Mar.:Sanvar, Katesavar
Ori.:--
Punj.:Simble
Tam.:Elavam
Tel.:Buruga
Urdu.:Sembhal
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Bark 0.5-1 cm thick, pale-ashy to silvery-grey externally, brownish internally,  
external surface rough with vertical and transverse cracks, mucilaginous on chewing;  
fracture, fibrous. 
b)  Microscopic:
Stem bark shows 10-15 layered, transversely elongated, radially arranged, thin-
walled, cork cells with a few outer layers having brown coloured contents; rhytidoma  
present at certain places interrupting the cork; secondary cortex con- sists of moderately  
thick-walled, parenchymatous cells containing orange brown contents; stone cells in  
singles or in groups, thick-walled, oval to irregular, and tangential bands of stone cells  
having striations with narrow lumen, measuring 13-33 µ in dia., occur throughout the  
secondary cortex; secondary phloem consists of usual elements traversed by phloem  
rays, elements in the outer region form tangential bands of ceratenchyma; a number of  
concentric bands of fibres alternating with groups of sieve elements also present; fibres  
lignified having narrow lumen and pointed tips; phloem rays numerous and wavy, 1-6  
seriate, cells being radially elongated and moderately thick-walled; rosette crystals of  
 184 calcium oxalate scattered throughout the secondary cortex, phloem parenchyma and ray  
cells; mucilage canals and tannin cells present in the parenchymatous cells of cortex. 
Powder - Reddish-brown; shows fragments of cork cells, parenchymatous cells, single or  
groups  of  thick-walled, oval  to  irregular,  stone  cells  having  striations  with  narrow  
lumen, measuring 13-33 µ in dia., rosette crystals of calcium oxalate, phloem fibres and  
numerous reddish-brown coloured masses and tannin cells. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than13Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9:1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) one fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.59 (blue). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour four spots appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.44, 0.59 and 0.92 (all yellow). On spraying  
with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110°C three 
spots appear at Rf. 0.44, 0.59 and 0.92 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Saponins, Tannins and Gums. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Picchila, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :áothahara, Kaphavardhaka, Pittahara, V¡tahara, D¡hapra¿amana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS -
THERAPEUTIC USES - Raktapitta, Vra¸a, D¡ha, Yuv¡napi·ik¡
DOSE - 5-10 g. (Powder). 
 185 82. Shana (Sd.) 
áAÛA (Seed)
áa¸a consists of dried seed of Crotolaria  juncea Linn. (Fam. Fabaceae), an erect 
shrubby annual, cultivated nearly throughout the country, and also found wild as an  
escape. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk:áa¸a, Malya PuÀpa
Assam:Ausa, Suila
Beng:Shanpat
Eng:Sunnhemp
Guj:Sun, Hemp
Hindi:Sunn, San
Kan:Senabu
Kash:--
Mal:Chanampayaru, Pulivanji
Mar:Sanavu
Ori:Champal Beeja
Punj:Sann
Tam:Sanal
Tel:Giliginta
Urdu:San
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Seed 0.5-0.7 cm long, 0.3-0.4 cm wide, flat and compressed, asymmetrically  
reniform; surface, glossy; colour, olive- green to grey; taste, mucilaginous. 
b)  Microscopic:
Seed shows testa, consisting of palisade like macrosclereids, covered externally  
by smooth, thick cuticle, followed by single layer of lignified flask shaped cells with  
intercellular spaces; the tissue beneath, consisting of tangentially elongated, thin-walled,  
crushed parenchymatous cells; endosperm consisting of an aleurone layer containing  
aleurone  grains  and  associated  parenchymatous  cells;  cotyledons  two,  consisting  of  
many  layered,  thin-walled,  compactly  arranged  parenchymatous  cells  containing  
abundant aleurone grains. 
Powder  - Greyish-yellow; shows polygonal, slightly thick-walled cells of the testa in  
surface  view,  beaker  or  flask  shaped  cells,  palisade  like  macrosclereids,  oval  to  
polygonal, thin walled parenchymatous cells and aleurone grains. 
 186 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than 2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than 0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 5.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 16Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9: 1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.05 (blue), 0.32 (faint  
sky blue) and 0.94 (sky blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots appear at Rf.  
0.05, 0.20, 0.26, 0.39, 0.67, 0.74, 0.94 and 0.98 (all yellow). On spraying with 5%  
Methanolic-Phosphomolybdic acid reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at  
105°C eight spots appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.20, 0.26, 0.39, 0.67, 0.74 (all grey), 0.94 and 0.98  
(both blue). 
CONSTITUENTS  - A bitter principle 'Corchorin' . 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Amla, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¡tahara, Garbh Anulomaka, Vantik¤t, Rakta  
Pravartaka 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Sarsap¡di, Pralepa, Da¿m£l¡dya Gh¤ta, Mukt¡dya  
C£r¸a, Kulatth¡dya Gh¤ta
THERAPEUTIC USES - Agnim¡ndya, Jvara, H¤droga, Mukharoga, RaktadoÀa, Carma  
Roga, Timra, Angamarda. Garbhasr¡bakara
DOSE - 1-3 g. of the drug in powder form.  
 187 83. Sara (Rt.) 
áËRA (Root)
á¡ra consists of dried roots of Saccharum bengalense Retz. Syn. S. sara Roxb.; S. 
munja Roxb. (Fam. Poaceae); an erect grass attaining a height of 5.5 m, found mainly in  
Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Bengal and Orissa. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Bhadr¡, M£nj¡
Assam.:--
Beng.:Sara
Eng.:--
Guj.:Sarkat
Hindi.:Sarkand, Moonja
Kan.:Munji Hullu, Hodake Hullu
Kash.:--
Mal.:Ama, Amaveru, Sara, Munjappullu
Mar.:Munja, Trikande
Ori.:Sara
Punj.:Moonja, Sarkanda
Tam.:Munjipul, Munjappullu
Tel.:Munja
Urdu.:Munja, Sarkanda
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Roots numerous, arising from a common root stock, cylindrical, 5-30 cm long,  
0.1-0.5 cm in dia., pale straw coloured with attached rootlets, bark papery; fracture  
splintery.
b)  Microscopic:
Root shows single layered epidermis consisting of cubicular to rectangular, thin-
walled cells; hypodermis single layered composed of parenchymatous cells; beneath  
hypodermis continuous ring of 2-5 layered, thick-walled, lignified, sclerenchymatous  
cells found scattered; cortex consisting of oval to round, thin walled parenchymatous  
cells, those of inner layers becoming smaller in size and rectangular in shape; endoderm  
is single layered forming a ring around stele, consisting of tangentially elongated cells;  
pericycle single layered composed of thin walled cells; xylem and phloem form equal  
number  of  bundles,  arranged  alternately  in  rings  consisting  of  usual  elements;  
metaxylem  elements  much  bigger  than protoxylem;  pith  distinct  consisting  of  thin-
walled, polygonal, parenchymatous cells having intercellular spaces. 
 188 Powder - Light greyish-brown; shows lignified, thick-walled, sclerenchymatous cells,  
and vessels with reticulate thickenings. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 3.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
Acid: Water (4:1:5) shows in visible light two spots at Rf. 0.69 and 0.97 (both grey).  
Under UV (366 nm) five blue fluorescent zones appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.19, 0.35, 0.69 and  
0.97. On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.10, 0.19, 0.35, 0.44,  
0.69, 0.80 and 0.97 (all yellowish brown). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric  
acid reagent and heating the plate at 110 °C for ten minutes eight spots appear at Rf.  
0.10, 0.19,0.35,0.61 (all grey), 0.80 (violet), 0.92 (grey), 0.95 and 0.97 (both violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sugars. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :AnuÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya,  CakÀuÀya,  D¡hahara,  Kaphahara,  V¤Àya,  T¤tdoÀahara,  T
¤s¸¡hara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - T¤¸apancam£la Kv¡tha C£r¸a, Br¡hma Ras¡yana,  
Sukum¡ra Gh¤ta
THERAPEUTIC USES - D¡ha, Aks¢roga, T¤À¸¡, ViÀarpa, M£trak¤cchra, Basti¿£la, M
£rch¡, Bhrama.
DOSE - 20 -50 g. of Kvatha Curna for decoction. 
                 6 -10 g. (Powder).
 189 84. Sarala (Ht.Wd.) 
SARALA (Heart Wood)
Sarala consists of dried heart wood of Pinus roxburghii Sargent (Fam. Pinaceae),  
a large tree upto 30 m high and 2.5 m in girth, growing on the Himalayas from 600 m to  
l830m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Surdhiasuka, P¢ta V¤kÀa
Assam.:--
Beng.:Tarper Telargaach, Sarala Gach
Eng.:Long Leaved Pine
Guj.:Saral
Hindi.:Cheed
Kan.:Saral
Kash.:--
Mal.:Saral, Saralam
Mar.:Saral
Ori.:--
Punj.:Cheel
Tam.:Saral, Shirsal
Tel.:Saral
Urdu.:Cheer, Sanobar
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug  available  as  chips  of  heart  wood,  yellowish-brown  when  fresh  and  
becoming brown on exposure; surface, smooth; fracture, short; resin canal strands and  
growth rings seen on fractured surface; taste, not distinct; odour, resinous and aromatic. 
b) Microscopic:
Wood  non-porous;  medullary  rays  and  schizogenous  resin  ducts  present,  
alternating bands of autumn wood and spring wood present; tracheids of spring wood,  
large, polygonal in shape and thinner than autumn tracheids; autumn tracheids small and  
nearly squarish in shape with several bordered pits arranged uniseriately on the radial  
walls of tracheids; medullary rays mostly uniseriate and upto 6 cells high, biseriate rays,  
upto 20 cells high, but only occasionally seen; schizogenous resin ducts fairly abundant  
in autumn wood and spring wood; each duct associated with some thin walled, cellulosic  
parenchyma. 
Powder - Yellowish-brown; shows numerous tracheids and pieces of medullary rays, and  
few resin debris.
 190 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(8 : 2) shows under UV (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.14 (yellow), 0.28, 0.48  
and 0.55 (all sky blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.14, 0.19,  
0.24,0.28 and 0.61 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and on  
heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes three spots appear at Rf. 0.28, 0.61 and 0.92  
(all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Oleo-resin and Flavonoids.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphav¡ta¿¡maka, Vra¸a¿odhaka, Svedahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Karp£r¡dyarka, Rajany¡di C£r¸a,  
Sudar¿ana C£r¸a
THERAPEUTIC USES - Kar¸aroga, Ka¸¶ha Roga, AkÀiroga, D¡ha, M£rcch¡,  
Vra¸a, K¡¿a SvarabhraÆ¿a, Y£k¡.
DOSE - 1-3 g. in powder form.
 191 85. Sarala (Rt.) 
SARALA (Root)
Sarala consists of dried root of Pinus roxburghii Sargent. (Fam. Pinaceae); a large  
tree upto 30 m high and 2.5 m in girth, growing on the Himalayas from 600m to 1830m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk:Surabhid¡ruka, P¢ta V¤kÀa 
Assam:--
Beng:Tarpin Telargaach, Sarala Gaach
Eng:Long Leaved Pine
Guj:Sarala
Hindi:Cheel
Kan:Sarala
Kash:--
Mal:Sarala, Saralam
Mar:Sarala
Ori:--
Punj:Cheel
Tam:Sarala, Shirsal
Tel:Sarala
Urdu:Cheer, Sanobar
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Root well-developed, 3-3.5 cm thick, hard, woody, cylindrical; reddish brown; 
surface rough due to longitudinal and transverse striations; fracture, hard; no smell and  
taste. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature root shows 10-15 layers of thin-walled, tangentially elongated cork cells  
filled with tannin; secondary cortex consists of a wide zone of thin-walled, rectangular  
to polygonal elongated cells mostly filled with starch grains, and of embedded resin  
canals; phloem a narrow strand composed of sieve tubes, parenchyma and phloem rays;  
tannin and starch grains also present in this  region;  xylem  composed of  tracheids,  
medullary rays and embedded resin ducts; tracheids thick walled, with bordered pits;  
xylem rays 1-2 cells wide and filled with starch grains; simple, round to oval, rarely  
elongated starch grains, measuring 11-25 µ in dia. 
Powder - Reddish-brown; shows fragments of cork cells, tracheids with bordered pits,  
resin canals, simple round to oval, starch grains measuring 11-25 µ in dia. and fragment  
of phloem and xylem rays filled with starch grains. 
 192 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Chloroform  :  
Methanol (9:1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.75, 0.88 and  
0.96 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.17, 0.53, 0.75,  
0.88 and 0.96 (all yellow). On spryaing with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and  
heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes three spots appear at Rf. 0.75, 0.88 and 0.96  
(all grey). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Resins - Oleo-resin.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphav¡ta¿¡maka, Vra¸a¿odhaka, Svedahara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Karp£r¡dyarka, Rajany¡di C£r¸a,  
Sudar¿ana C£r¸a
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Kar¸a Roga, Kan¶ha Roga, AkÀi Roga, D¡ha,Vra¸a,  
K¡sa, SvarabhraÆsa
DOSE - 1-3 g. in powder form.
 193 86. Sarshapa (Sd.) 
SARâAPA (Seed)
SarÀapa consists of dried seed of Brassica campestris Linn. (Fam. Brassicaceae),  
an  erect,  stout,  simple  or  branched,  glaucous,  annual  herb,  50  to  60  cm  tall  with  
amplexicaul leaves, commonly cultivated in Bengal, Bihar, D.P. and Punjab, and also  
found occasionally as an escape in waste places and fields. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Ka¶usneha, Siddh¡rtha
Assam.:--
Beng.:Sarisa
Eng.:Mustard
Guj.:Sarasad, Rai
Hindi.:Saraso
Kan.:Sasuve, Sasuvae, Sasive
Kash.:--
Mal.:Katuka
Mar.:Mohari
Ori.:--
Punj.:Sarayo, Sarson
Tam.:Kaduga
Tel.:Avalu
Urdu.:Sarson
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Seeds small, slightly oblong, pale or reddish-brown, bright, smooth, 1.2- 1.5 mm  
in dia.; under magnifying glass it is seen to be minutely reticulated; taste, bitter and  
sharp. 
b)  Microscopic:
Seed shows single layered colourless testa followed by 3-5 layered, non-lignified,  
hexagonal,  thick-walled  cells  filled  with  yellowish-brown  contents;  embryo  and  
endosperm  consists  of  hexagonal,  thin-walled  parenchymatous  cells  containing  oil  
globules. 
Powder  - Yellow in colour with brown particles and oily, slightly bitter and sharp in  
taste; shows frequently thick-walled, fragments of reddish-brown cells of hypodermis,  
yellowish hyaline masses. 
 194 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 16Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
Fixed Oil Not less than35Per cent, Appendix 2.2.8
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9 : 1) shows under UV (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf. O. 12 and 0.59 (both blue).  
On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.12, 0.59 and 0.70 (all yellow).  
On spraying with Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten  
minutes at 1050 C three spots appear at Rf. 0.12, 0.59 and 0.70 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Snigdha, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphahara, Pittakara, V¡tahara, Vid¡ha, H¤dya. 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Mah¡ Yogar¡ja Guggulu, K¡rp¡sasthy¡di Taila,  
Ku´kum¡di Taila, Prabhanjana Vimardana  
Taila, Vajraka Taila.
THERAPEUTIC USES - Ka¸·u, KuÀ¶ha, KoÀ¶hak¤mi, Grahab¡dh¡.
DOSE - 0.5-1 g. in paste form.
 195 87. Satapatrika (Fl.) 
SATAPATRIKË  (Flower)
Satapatrik¡ consists of dried flower of Rosa centifolia Linn. (Fam. Rosaceae); a  
small erect shrub, 1-1.8 m high, cultivated in gardens. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Devataru¸¢, Kar¸ik¡,
Assam.:Varde Ahamar
Beng.:Golap
Eng.:Rose
Guj.:Moshamee Gulab
Hindi.:Gulab
Kan.:Rojahu
Kash.:-
Mal.:Rosappoovu
Mar.:Gulab
Ori.:--
Punj.:Gulab
Tam.:Rojapoo
Tel.:Rojapuvvu, Gulabi
Urdu.:Gulab, Ward
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Flower stalked, pinkish-yellow, consists of sepals, petals and stamens attached to  
pedicel with thalamus at the base; stalk 0.6-3.5 cm long, light green, slender, covered  
with  numerous  prickles  and  hairs;  thalamus  1.0-1.8  cm  long,  light  greenish brown, 
covered with numerous prickles and hairs; sepal 5, free, 1.3-2.4 cm long, unequal, leaf-
like,  upper  part  creamish-green  and  light  yellowish-green  on  lower  part,  having  
glandular hairs; petals numerous, pinkish-yellow, 1.5-4.2 cm long, 1.3-2.5 cm wide,  
smooth  obovate  to  sub-cordate;  stamens  numerous,  free,  unequal,  dorsifixed,  dark-
brown; filament 0.3-0.5 cm long; carpels many free, ovary inferior; styles lateral, hairy,  
free; stigma terminal; taste, astringent; odour, aromatic. 
b)  Microscopic:
Sepal - Shows single layered epidermis on both surfaces; numerous long, unicellular  
hairs present on upper surface, a few glandular hairs on lower surface; both epidermises  
followed  by  a  wide  zone  of  mesophyll  consisting  of  round  to  oval,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells; a number of vascular bundles found scattered in this region. 
Petal - Shows lower epidermis papillose and without cuticle; upper epidermis single  
layered with thin striated cuticle, followed by mesophyll consisting of oval to polygonal,  
 196 elliptical,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells;  a  number  of  vascular  bundles  found  
scattered in this zone. 
Powder - Light-brown in colour; fragments of petal of epidermis consisting of thin -
walled, sinuous cells extended to form papillae; xylem vessel with spiral thickenings  
long, pointed, uniseriate, unicellular hair and stalked capitate glandular hairs; abundant,  
smooth, spherical pollen grains, measuring 27- 41 µ in dia., containing clear intine and  
exine with three distinct pores. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than7.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 15Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 24Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using n-Butanol : Acetic acid:  
Water (5:1:4) shows in visible light six spots at Rf. 0.42 (violet), 0.50 (pink), 0.66, 0.82,  
0.87 and 0.92 (all yellow). Under U.V. (366 nm) five fluorescent zones are visible at Rf.  
0.42 (blue), 0.50 (pink), 0.82, 0.87 and 0.92 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour six  
spots  appear at Rf. 0.42 (grey), 0.50 (pinkish grey), 0.66, 0.82, 0.87 and 0.92 (all  
yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate  
for about ten minutes at 110 °C eight spots appear at Rf. 0.19 (greyish black), 0.32  
(greyish black), 0.42, 0.50 (both violet), 0.66, 0.82, 0.87 and 0.92 (all brown).
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential Oil. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION –
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :áukrakara,  D¢pana,  H¤dya,  Kaphahara,  Netrya,  Pittahara,  
V¡tahara, Var¸aya. 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Vasanta Kusum¡kara Rasa, Taru¸¡rka (Gulabjala),  
Prav¡la PiÀ¶i, Mukt¡ PiÀ¶i, Zahara Mohara PiÀ¶i,  
T¤¸ak¡nta Ma¸i PiÀ¶i
THERAPEUTIC USES - KuÀ¶ha, D¡ha, Mukhaspho¶a, Raktapitta, Raktavik¡ra.   
DOSE - 3-6 g. of the drug in powder form. 
 197 88. Simpshapa (Ht.Wd.) 
áIêáAPË (Heart Wood)
áiÆ¿ap¡ consists of dried heart wood of Dalbergia sissoo Roxb. (Fam. Fabaceae),  
a medium sized, deciduous tree, found in western Himalayas upto 1220 m altitude and  
from Sikkim to upper Assam, and extensively planted throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:K¤sa¸a S¡ra, áy¡m¡
Assam.:--
Beng.:Shishu
Eng.:Sissoo Tree
Guj.:Sisam
Hindi.:Seesam
Kan.:Eragundimavu, Bindi
Kash.:--
Mal.:Irupoola
Mar.:Sisu, Shisav
Ori.:Sisu, Sinsapa
Punj.:Sheesham 
Tam.:Irupoolai
Tel.:Irugudu, Virugudu, Sissoo
Urdu.:Sheesham
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug consists of pieces of wood of variable lengths and widths, brown, very hard  
and strong; close-grained, annual ring not distinct, rays fine, pores uniformly distributed  
joined by wavy concentric bands; fracture hard and tough. 
b)  Microscopic:
Heart wood shows well developed xylem, consisting of usual elements, vessels  
simple pitted, solitary or 2-3 in groups, arranged in radial rings, a few contain reddish-
brown content; parenchyma thick walled and paratracheal; medullary rays 1-3 cells  
wide; fibres abundant in numbers and present in groups alternating with the bands of  
xylem parenchyma. 
Powder - Brown; under microscope shows fibres, tracheids and parenchymatous cells. 
 198 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Identification - 
Fluorescence test on aqueous and alcoholic extracts
i) 5 g. extracted in 100 ml of water and filtered shows in day light - light-brown colour;  
under U.V. light (366 nm) greenish-brown, and under U.V. light (254 nm) yellowish-
green.
ii) 5 g. extracted in 100 ml of alcohol and filtered shows in day light - darkbrown colour;  
under U.V. light (366 nm) dark-brown, and under U.V. light (254) dark-brown. 
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. - 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(7: 3) in visible light shows nine spots at Rf. 0.14, 0.19, 0.27 (all grey), 0.52 (yellow),  
0.56, 0.62, 0.70, 0.75 and 0.86 (all grey. Under UV (366 nm) five fluorescent zones  
appear at Rf. 0.19 (yellowish blue), 0.27, 0.42 (both light blue), 0.52 and 0.70 (both  
blue). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for  
ten minutes at 110 °C eleven spots appear at Rf. 0.19(orange), 0.27, 0.30 (both grey),  
0.36 (yellowish grey), 0.47 (grey), 0.52 (green), 0.56 (grey), 0.62 (light green), 0.70  
(grey), 0.86 (geen) and 0.88 (grey). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil, Essential Oil, Tannins and Flavonoids.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, Picchila 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Medohara, Pittahara, V¡tahara, Var¸ya, Kaphavi¿oÀ¸a,  
Medovi¿oÀa¸a,  áukrado¿ahara,  Saiya,  Rucikara  Gabrhap¡tin¢  
áoÀahai Pipana 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Ayask¤i, NarasiÆiha Gh¤ta, Mah¡khadira Gh¤ta
THERAPEUTIC USES - KuÀ¶ha, K¤mi, D¡ha, ávitra, Vra¸a, M£tra¿arkar¡, Basti  
Roga, Hikk¡, Prameha, Ar¿a, Jvara, Gulma, A¿mar¢, Atis¡ra,  
Rakta Vik¡ra, áoÀa, áopha, P¡¸·u, Chardi, P¢nasa, DuÀ¶a  
Vra¸a, Vas¡meha, Sarvajvara
DOSE - 5 -10 g. of the drug in powder form.
               10 -20 g. for decoction.
 199 89. Simpshapa (St.Bk.) 
áIêáAPË (Stem Bark)
áiÆ¿ap¡ consists of dried stem bark of Dalbergia sissoo Roxb. (Fam. Fabaceae);  
a medium sized, deciduous tree, found in Western Himalayas upto 1220 m altitude, and  
from Sikkim to upper Assam, and extensively planted throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:K¤sa¸a S¡ra, áy¡m¡
Assam.:--
Beng.:Shishu
Eng.:Sissoo Tree
Guj.:Siram
Hindi.:Seesam
Kan.:Eragundimavu, Bindi
Kash.:--
Mal.:Irupoola
Mar.:Sisu, Shisav
Ori.:Sisu, Sinsapa
Punj.:Sheesham
Tam.:Irupoolai
Tel.:Irugudu, Virugudu, Sissoo
Urdu.:Sheesham
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Bark 3-5 cm long, curved or flat, fibrous, cut pieces; external surface rough with  
shallow, broad longitudinal fissures, exfoliating in irregular, woody strips and scales;  
pale yellow to dark reddish-brown; fracture, fibrous.
b)  Microscopic:
Mature stem bark consists of 6-25 or more rows of rectangular, thin-walled,  
radially  arranged  cork cells, a few outer  layers exfoliating;  secondary  cortex wide  
consisting of round or oval, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, a number of groups of  
sclerenchymatous cells, found scattered throughout secondary cortex, a few cortical  
cells  contain  prismatic  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  secondary  phloem  very  wide  
consisting of usual elements of thin-walled cells and tangential strips of phloem fibres;  
collapsed, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells present in tangential strips throughout the  
secondary  phloem;  most  of  phloem  fibres  and  parenchyma  cells  contain  prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate; phloem rays short, uni to triseriate, consisting of radially  
elongated, thin-walled, parenchymatous. cells.
 200 Powder -  Light  brown;  shows  thin-walled  parenchymatous  cells,  phloem  fibres,  
fragments of cork cells and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than14Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 7Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel ‘G’ plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9 : 1) shows under UV (366 nm) five fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.28, 0.59, 0.71, 0.78 and  
0.93 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf. 0.34, 0.51, 0.59,  
0.71. 0.75 and 0.78 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and  
heating the plate for fifteen minutes at 105 ° C six spots appear at Rf. 0.34, 0.51, 0.59,  
0.71, 0.75, 0.78 (all violet).
CONSTITUENTS  - Flavonoids.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Balya,  Rucikara,  TridoÀahara,  V¡maka,  Vra¸sodhana,  
Garbhap¡tkar, Medoara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - NarasiÆhagh¤ta Ras¡yana
THERAPEUTIC USES - KuÀ¶ha, ávitra, K¤mi, Bastiroga , Dus¶a, Vra¸a, D¡ha,  
Ka¸·u, Hikk¡, áopha, Visarpa, P¢nasa
DOSE - 3-6 g. of the drug in powder form
               50-100 ml of the drug for decoction
 201 90. Sirisha (St.Bk.)
áIRÌâA (Stem Bark)
áir¢Àa consists of stem bark of Albizzia lebbeck Benth. (Fam. Fabaceae), a large  
tree, common throughout the country, ascending to 1200 m on the Himalayas. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Bha¸·i, á¢tapuÀpa, áukapriya, M¤dupuÀpa
Assam.:--
Beng.:Sirish, Siris
Eng.:Siris Tree, Lebbeck Tree
Guj.:Shirish
Hindi.:Siris, Shiris
Kan.:Bagey, Bage Mara, Hombage
Kash.:--
Mal.:Vaka, Nanmenivaka
Mar.:Siris
Ori.:Sersuan, Sirisha
Punj.:Sirish, Sareehn
Tam.:Vakai
Tel.:Dirisena
Urdu.:Siris
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Bark 1.5 - 2.5 cm thick, external surface dark brown, rough due to longitudinal  
fissures and transverse cracks, rhytidoma forming major part of bark and peeling off in  
flakes exposing buff coloured surface, middle bark brown, inner bark much fibrous. light  
yellow to grey; fracture, laminated in outer region and fibrous in inner region; taste, very  
astringent. 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature bark about 2 cm thick, shows dead tissue of rhytidoma; cork consists of a  
few layers of thin-walled, transversely elongated and radially arranged cells; secondary  
cortex wide, composed of radially elongated to squarish, moderately thick walled cells 
containing  orange  to  reddish-brown  contents;  a  few  of  the  cells  contain  prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate; stone cells, variable in shape and size, present in singles or  
in groups throughout the region; secondary phloem consists of sieve elements, phloem  
parenchyma,  phloem  fibres  and  crystal  fibres,  traversed  by  phloem  rays;  prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate present in most of the phloem parenchyma cells; tangential  
bands  of  ceratenchyma  present  in  middle  and  outer  phloem  region;  phloem  fibres.  
elongated, thick-walled, lignified, present in many concentric strips, mostly enclosed by  
crystals sheath throughout the middle and inner regions of phloem; crystal fibres having  
 202 a  number  of  septa,  each  chamber  containing  a  single  prismatic  crystal  of  calcium  
oxalate; phloem rays numerous, radially elongated, somewhat wavy in outer phloem  
region and bi to multiseriate in the inner phloem region. being 2 - 5 cells wide and 7 - 25  
cells high. 
Powder -  Greyish-brown;  shows  large  number  of  stone  cells,  prismatic  crystals  of  
calcium oxalate, crystal fibres and phloem fibres. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 12Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9: 1) shows under UV (366 nm) a fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.63 (blue). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour two spots appear at Rf. 0.07 and 0.21 (both yellow). On spraying with 5%  
Methanolic-Phosphomolybdic  acid  reagent  and  heating  the  plate  at  105 °C  for  ten 
minutes two spots appear at Rf. 0.07 and 0.21 (both light blue). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Saponins and Tannins. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :AnuÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :áothahara, TridoÀahara, ViÀghna, TvagdoÀa, Var¸ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Vajraka Taila, Da¿¡nga Lepa, Ayak¤ti,  
Devad¡rv¡riÀ¶a, B¤hanmaricy¡di Taila
THERAPEUTIC USES - P¡m¡, KuÀ¶ha, Ka¸·u, Visarpa, K¡sa, Vra¸a, áotha, áv¡sa, M
£saka Visa, á¢ta Pitta, RaktaduÀ¶i, P¢nasa, ViÀmajvara,  
Pratisy¡ya, Sarpdan¿a, (Casake), ViÀaduÀ¶i, Sury¡varta,  
Ardh¡vabhedaka, K¤mi Roga, Netr¡bhiaÀanda.
DOSE - 25-50 g. (Kwatha), 
               3-6 g. (Curna), 
 203 91. Sthauneya (Lf.)
STHAUÛEYA (Leaf)
Sthau¸eya consists of dried leaf of  Taxus baccata  Linn. (Farn. Taxaceae); an  
evergreen conifer, about 6.5 m high, distributed in the temperate Himalayas at altitudes  
between 1800-3300 m and in the hills of Meghalaya and Manipur at an altitude of  
1500m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:áukapuÀpa, Vikar¸a
Assam.:--
Beng.:Birmi, Bhirmie, Talish Patra, Bhada Getela
Eng.:Himalayan Yew
Guj.:Gethela Barmi
Hindi.:Thuner, Talispatra Bhed
Kan.:Sthauneyak
Kash.:--
Mal.:Thuriangam, Tuniyankam
Mar.:Sthauney Barmi
Ori.:Talisabhed, Chalisa Patra
Punj.:Birmi
Tam.:Talisapatri-Bhedam
Tel.:Taleesa Patri Bhedamu
Urdu.:Birmi, Zarnab
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug occurs as whole or broken leaf pieces, entire leaf flattended, linear with  
recurved margins, 1.3-4.0 cm long and 0.1-0.3 cm wide, tip sharp pointed and prickly,  
entire. thick, brown above, but paler below; petiole, very short; odour. pleasant; taste, 
acrid, bitter and disagreeable. 
b)  Microscopic:
Leaf-
Lamina  -  shows  dorsi  ventral  structure,  margin  slightly  turned  downward;  upper  
epidermis single layered covered with thick, striated cuticle; lower epidermis single  
layered  with  papillate  projection;  sunken  stomata  present  only  on  lower  surface,  
overhung by subsidiary cells; palisade two layered; spongy parenchyma 3-5 layered.  
thin-walled, oval or irregular in shape, containing reddish-brown contents; vascular  
bundle single, present in the midrib within an endodermis.
 204 Powder - Brown; shows fragments of reddish-brown spongy parenchyma cells and very  
rarely xylem tracheids, polygonal epidermal cells with striated cuticle and a few sunken  
stomata in surface view. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 16Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4 : 1 : 5) shows under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.67  
(pink), 0.95 (grey) and 0.98 (pink). Under visible light shows three spots at Rf. 0.91  
(pink), 0.95 (pink) and 0.98 (greenish yellow). On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots  
appear at Rf. 0.08, 0.29, 0.60, 0.70, 0.82, 0.91 and 0.95 (all yellow). 
CONSTITUENTS  -Alkaloids  -  Taxine,  Ephedrine,  Glycoside,  Tannins,  Resins,  
Reducing Sugars and Formic Acid. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Jantughna,  Kaphahara,  Medhya,  V¡tahara,  áukravardhaka,  
Pitta¿¡maka, Var¸a Pras¡dana, Lomasanjanana. 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Mah¡n¡r¡ya¸ataila, Bal¡ Taila
THERAPEUTIC USES - Rakta Vik¡ra, T¤À¸¡, Tila K¡laka, D¡ha, KuÀ¶ha, K¤mi  
Roga, Pi·ik¡, Arbuda (Karka¶a)
DOSE - 1-3 g. of the drug in powder form. 
 205 92. Surana (Corm) 
SÍRAÛA (Corm)
S£ra¸a consists of dried corm of Amorphophallus campanulatus (Roxb.) Blume. 
(Fam.  Araceae);  a  stout,  herbaceous  plant,  cultivated  throughout  the  plains  of  the  
country.
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Ar¿oghna, Kandala
Assam.:--
Beng.:Ole
Eng.:Elephant Foot
Guj.:Sooran
Hindi.:Suranakanda, Zamikanda
Kan.:Suranagadde
Kash.:--
Mal.:Chena, Kattuchena, Kattuchenai, Cena Karana
Mar.:Jungli Suran, Suran
Ori.:Olooakanda, Suran
Punj.:Gimikanda
Tam.:Karunai Kizhangu
Tel.:Mancai Kanda Durada Gadda
Urdu.:Zamin-qand, Zamikand
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug occurs as cut pieces of different shapes and sizes; external surface of cork  
blackish-brown, rough due to numerous scars and a few adventitious roots, internal  
portion creamish white; fracture, short; taste, acrid. 
b)  Microscopic:
Corm  shows  a wide  zone  of  cork  consisting  of  5-25  tangentially  elongated,  
rectangular, thin-walled cells, a few inner layers containing rosette crystals of calcium  
oxalate, and plenty of simple and compound starch grains; ground tissue very wide  
consisting of thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; a few cells containing both rosette and  
acicular crystals of calcium oxalate; starch grains both simple and compound, spherical  
in shape consisting of 2-4 components, measuring 3-31 µ in diameter; vascular bundles  
poorly developed, scattered in ground tissue; vessels arranged in groups of 2-3, having  
spiral thickenings; a few parenchyma cells of ground tissue containing yellowish cell  
contents. 
Powder -  Creamish-grey;  shows  abundant  simple  and  compound  starch  grains,  
measuring 3-31 µ in dia., fragments of cork cells, a few rosette and acicular crystals of  
calcium oxalate. 
 206 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 9Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Benzene: Ethylacetate  
(9: 1) on exposure to Iodine vapour shows for four spots at Rf. 0.09, 0.66, 0.74 and 0.85  
(all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Phosphomolybdic acid and heating the  
plate at 105°C for ten minutes four spots appear at Rf. 0.09, 0.66, 0.74 and 0.85 (all  
grey).
CONSTITUENTS  - Betulinic Acid, β-Sitosterol, Stigmasterol, Lupeol, Triacontane,  
Glucose, Galactose, Rhamnose and Xylose. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Ka¶u, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, Va¿ada 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphahara, Rucya, ViÀambh¢, V¡takara Pittakara, Gudak
¢lah¤t, Raktapittakara, Dadrukara, KuÀ¶hakara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Sura¸¡valoha, S£r¸ava¶aka, S¡mudradya C£r¸a 
THERAPEUTIC USES - Ar¿a, Pl¢hagulma, áv¡sa, K¡sa, ËÀth¢l¡
DOSE - 2-10 g. of the drug in powder form. 
 207 93. Svetachandana (Ht. Wd.)
áVETACANDANA (Heart Wood)
ávetacandana  consists  of  dried  heart  wood  of  Santalum  album  Linn.  (Fam. 
Santalaceae), an evergreen, semi parasitic tree, 8 to 18 m in height and 2 to 4 m in girth,  
widely distributed in the country, commonly found in the dry regions of peninsular India  
from  Vindhya  mountains  southwards,  especially  in  Karnataka  and  Tamilnadu;  it  is  
cultivated for its aromatic wood and oil. 
SYNONYMS - 
Sansk:ár¢kha¸·a, ávetacandana
Assam:Sandale Avyaj
Beng:Chandan
Eng:Sandal Wood
Guj:Sukhad
Hindi:Chandan, Safed Chandan
Kan:Shrigandhamara, Shrigandha, Chand
Kash:--
Mal:Chandanam
Mar:Chandan
Ori:--
Punj:Chandan
Tam:Chandana maram, Sandanam, Ingam
Tel:Gandhapu Chekka, Manchi Gandham, Tella Chandanam, Sriga
Urdu:Sandal Safed
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Yellowish-brown  to  pale-reddish  orange,  heavy,  dense,  hard but  split  easily;  
transversely smooth surface shows  alternating light  and dark concentric zones with  
numerous pores, traversed by very fine medullary rays; odour, persistently aromatic;  
taste, slightly bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Wood consists of tracheids, vessels, fibres, xylem parenchyma and traversed by  
medullary rays; vessels numerous scattered singly throughout the region, rarely two  
together, barrel-shaped, pitted and with transverse to oblique pen oration with tail-like  
projections, at one or both ends; a few tracheids elongated with tapering ends and  
possess bordered pits on their walls; fibres many, lignified with pointed tips; xylem  
parenchyma mostly rectangular, a few of them contain prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate; xylem rays numerous, run straight, uni to triseriate, mostly biseriate, thick-
walled, radially elongated having golden yellow to brownish contents and contain a few  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. 
 208 Powder -  Light-brown  and  aromatic;  shows  pitted  vessels  with  tails,  isolated  or  
associated with fibres, fragments of fibres, square to rectangular-shaped parenchyma,  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, and numerous oil globules. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.2Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
Volatile Oil Not less than1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.10
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(93 : 7) shows on  exposure to Iodine vapour  six spots  at Rf 0.05, 0.10, 0.27 (all  
yellowish  brown),  0.60  (dark  brown),  0.82  and  0.91  (both  yellowish  brown).  On  
spraying with Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric acid reagent- and heating the plate for about ten  
minutes at 1I0·C six spots appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.10, 0.27 (all bluish violet), 0.60 (violet).  
0.82 and 0.91 (both bluish violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Volatile oil (α- and β- Santalol) 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :H¤dya, K¤mighna, Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¤Àya, Var¸ya, ViÀghna,  
Durgandhahara, D¡hapras¡mana, T¤À¸¡hara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Ayaskrti, Asvagandh¡dyariÀ¶a, S¡rvivady¡sava,  
Arimed¡di Taila, Bal¡dh¡try¡di Taila, Marma  
Gu¶ika, Candan¡sava, Candan¡di C£r¸a,  
Candan¡di Taila.
THERAPEUTIC USES - áoÀa, D¡ha, Raktapitta, Rakt¡r¿a, Hikk¡, Vamana, Rakt¡  
Tis¡ra, Pradara, áukrameha, Netra Roga, Mutragh¡ta, Bhrama,  
Raktavik¡ra, K¤mi Roga.
DOSE - 3-6 g. of the drug in powder form.  
 209 94. Shyonaka (Rt.) 
áYONËKA (Root)
áyon¡ka consists of dried root of Oroxylum indicum Vent. (Fam. Bignoniaceae);  
a small tree, distributed throughout the country, chiefly in evergreen forest upto 600 m.
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:D¢rghav¤nta, P¤thsuimba, Ka¶va´ga
Assam.:Kering
Beng.:Sonagachh
Eng.:--
Guj.:Tentoo
Hindi.:Sonapatha, Shyonak, Tentoo
Kan.:Tigudu
Kash.:--
Mal.:Palagripayanni
Mar.:Tentoo
Ori.:Pamponiya
Punj.:Tatpaling, Talvarphali
Tam.:Peruvagai
Tel.:Dundilumu, Gumpena, Pampini
Urdu.:Sonapatha
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug available in cut pieces, having secondary  roots, greyish-brown to light  
brown, cut surface brownish-cream, cylindrical, ribbed at few places, 5-16 cm long, 1-3  
cm thick, external surface rough due to longitudinal and transverse cracks, fracture,  
short; taste, slightly sweet. 
b)  Microscopic:
Root mature root shows 10-30 or more layers of tangentially elongated, radially  
arranged cork cells filled with reddish-brown content; secondary cortex composed of  
oval to polygonal, parenchymatous cells; stone cells, thick-walled, lignified of various  
shapes  and sizes with narrow lumen, distinct pits and striations;  secondary phloem  
composed of sieve tubes, parenchyma, fibres and groups of stone cells; groups of fibres  
traversed by 2-8 cells wide phloem rays; secondary xylem consists of usual elements;  
xylem vessels of various sizes, occur in singles and groups of 2-5 cells arranged radially  
having reticulate thickening; xylem rays 2-4 cells wide; fibres having wide lumen and  
pointed tips, and tracheids present. 
 210 Powder - Brownish-cream; shows groups of stone cells, fragments of cork, phloern  
fibres with wide lumen and pointed tips and reticulate vessels and tracheids. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 20Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 42Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4: 1 : 5) shows under UV (366 nm) a fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.10 (blue). On  
exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.30, 0.58, 0.70, 0.85 and 0.95  
(all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid and heating the plate for  
ten minutes at 105 °C five spots appear at Rf. 0.25, 0.58, 0.70, 0.85 and 0.95 (all grey).
CONSTITUENTS  - Flavonoids and Tannins.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphapitta¿¡maka, Gr¡hi 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Amrt¡riÀ¶a, Danty¡dyariÀ¶a, Da¿am£l¡riÀ¶a,  
N¡r¡ya¸a Taila, Dh¡navantara Gh¤ta, Br¡hma  
Ras¡yana, Da¿am£la Kv¡tha C£r¸a,  
Cyavanapr¡¿a, Awaleha
THERAPEUTIC USES - V¡t¡tis¡ra, K¡sa, Aruci, Basti Roga, Ëmav¡ta, Udara Roga,  
Urustambha, V¡tavy¡dhi, Kar¸a Roga, áotha
DOSE - 5-10 g. in powder form.
               25-50 g. in decoction.
 211 95. Tala (Infl.) 
TËLA (Inflorescence)
T¡la consists of dried male inflorescence of  Borassus flabellifer  Linn. (Fam. 
Araceae); a tall, stout, dioecious palm tree having a height of 11.8-30 m and girth 1-2 m,  
bearing a terminal crown of 30-40 large fan like leaves, 90 cm - 1.6 m in width,  
cultivated and also found wild throughout India in the Peninsular coastal areas and in  
fields. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Lekhyapatra
Assam.:--
Beng.:Tala
Eng.:Palmyra Palm
Guj.:Tada, Tad
Hindi.:Tal
Kan.:Talimera, Oleyagida, Nelatalea Talimara
Kash.:--
Mal.:Panavirala
Mar.:Tada, Toad
Ori.:--
Punj.:Tad
Tam.:Panaimaram, Panai
Tel.:Tadi, Tati
Urdu.:Taad
DESCRIPTION -
Macroscopic: 
Drug available in transversely cut pieces of inflorescence, measuring upto 1 cm  
thick and 2.5 - 3 cm in dia., transversely cut surface shows a central axis with a number  
of male flowers arranged around it, external surface yellowish-grey and rough due to  
scales;  flower  unisexual,  actinomorphic,  sessile,  arranged  in  a  close  spiral  on  the  
infloresence axis, 3-4 mm long, reddish-brown in colour; perianth consists of 6 sepals,  
tough, persistent, free, valvate; stamen 6, in two whorls of three each, 1-1.5 mm long,  
yellowish in colour; filament free, united at base into a ring; anther linear and basifixed;  
no smell and taste.
 
Powder -Reddish-brown; shows fragments of thin-walled, slightly wavy, large, oval to  
polygonal  parenchymatous  cells  of  perianth  epidermis  in  surface  view;  numerous,  
simple, yellowish-orange, spherical-shaped pollen grains, measuring 16-44  µ in dia., 
with distinct exine and intine; large brown pieces of thick-walled, single layered pollen  
sac, 34 layered, endothelial cells having a few small pollen grains. 
 212 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than7.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4 : 1 : 5) shows under UV (366 nm) a blue fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.93. On  
spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid and heating the plate for ten minutes at  
110°C four spots appear at Rf. 0.44, 0.61, 0.73 (all light brown) and 0.93 (brown). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Kernels contain Galactomannan (Polysacchride)
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :á¢ta, Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :áukrala, B¤Æha¸a, K¤mighna, Pittahara, V¡tahara, V¤Àya, Tarpaka,  
Sirovirecaka, Vasti¿uddhikara, Medakara, Vra¸n¡¿aka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Avlttol¡di Bhasma (KÀ¡ra), Panviral¡di Bhasma,  
(T¡la Puspodbhaba KÀ¡ra) Gu·a Pippal¢
THERAPEUTIC USES - Raktapitta, UrahkÀata, áv¡sa, D¡ha, K¤mi, M£trak¤cchra,  
áophaghna, Vandhyakara
DOSE - 1-3 g
 213 96. Trivrit (Rt) 
TRIVRT (Root)
Trivrt consists of dried root of  Operculina turpethum  (Linn.) Silva Manso Syn.  
Ipomoea turpethum R. Br. (Fam. Convolvulaceae); a large perennial twiner with milky  
juice and fleshy roots, found growing wild nearly throughout the country, ascending to  
900 m, also occasionally grown in gardens; the roots being fleshy, care is taken in drying  
as they decay easily; roots therefore cut into pieces and the cut portions are exposed to  
sun for a day or so, after which it is finally dried in shade. 
SYNONYMS - 
Sansk.:áy¡m¡, Tribha¸·¢
Assam.:--
Beng.:Teudi, Tvuri, Dhdhakalami
Eng.:Terpeth Root, Indian Jalap
Guj.:Kala Nasottara
Hindi.:Nishothra
Kan.:Vili Tigade
Kash.:--
Mal.:Trikolpokanna
Mar.:Nisottar
Ori.:Dudholomo
Punj.:Nisoth
Tam.:Karum Sivadai
Tel.:Tella, Tegada
Urdu.:Turbud, Nishoth
DESCRIPTION -
a) Macroscopic: 
Roots  occur  in  pieces,  1.5-15  cm  long,  1-5  cm  dia.,  usually  unbranched,  
cylindrical, elongated, bearing thin rootlets; thicker pieces, occasionally split and show  
central wood portion; surface dull grey, reddish-grey to light brown, showing deep  
furrows or longitudinal wrinkles giving a rope-like or columnar appearance; transversely  
cut surface shows thick, whitish bark and light yellow centre; fracture in bark, short; in  
wood, fibrous; odour, indistinct; taste, slightly acrid and nauseating when kept in mouth  
for some time 
b)  Microscopic:
Mature root shows thin cork, consisting of3-5 rows of brown cells; secondary  
cortex 4-6 layered, composed of tangential elongated, thin-walled cells; some of the  
cortical  cells  become  thick-walled  appearing  as  isolated,  oval  to  subrectangular  
sclerenchymatous cells having wide lumen; secretory cavities surrounded by subsidiary  
cells and resin canals found scattered in secondary cortex; secondary phloem, a wide  
zone, consisting of sieve elements and phloem parenchyma; vascular bundles arranged in  
 214 a continuous and a discontinuous ring, traversed by uni and biseriate medullary rays;  
numerous  resin  cells  also  seen  in  phloem  in  longitudinal  rows;  xylem  shows  3-5  
radiating arms; small patches of intraxylary phloem often formed; xylem vessels in  
singles or 2-3 in groups, having simple pits on their walls; calcium oxalate crystals as  
prisms and rosettes found scattered in cortex, phloem parenchyma, xylem parenchyma  
and medullary ray cells; starch grains, both simple .and compound, simple ones elliptical  
to spherical with central cleft hilum, compound grains consisting of 2-4 components,  
size vary from 5-44  µ in dia., found scattered in cortex, phloem parenchyma, xylem  
parenchyma and medullary ray cells. 
Powder  - Greyish to light brown; shows parenchymatous cells, cellulosic fibres with  
pointed tips, vessels with simple pits, simple and compound starch grains elliptical to  
spherical with central cleft, measuring 5-44 µ in dia., having 2-4 components, rosette and  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Nil            Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than1.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene : Ethylacetate  
(9:1) shows under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.08, 0.21 (both light  
blue) and 0.58 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.21, 0.41,  
0.49, 0.58, 0.71, 0.90 and 0.97 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin Sulphuric acid 
reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C seven spots appear at Rf. 0.21,  
0.41, 0.49 (all light violet), 0.58, 0.70, 0.90 and 0.97 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Resinous Glycosides. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphapittahara,  Pittahara,  V¡tala,  Virecana,  Sukhavirecanaka,  
Jvarahara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Hrdyavirecana Leha, A¿vagandhariÀ¶a,  
Avipattikara C£r¸a, Manibhadra Gu·a
THERAPEUTIC USES - Malabandha, Gulma, Udara Roga, Jvara, áopha P¡¸·u,  
Plih¡, Vra¸a, K¤mi, KuÀ¶ha,  Ka¸·u
DOSE - 1-3 g of the drug in powder form.
 215 97. Tumbini (Fr. Frt.) 
TUMBINÌ (Fresh Fruit)
Tumbin¢ consists of fresh fruit (devoid of stalk) of  Lagenaria siceraria  (Mol.) 
StandI.  Syn.  L.  leucantha  Rusby.,  L.  vulgaris  Ser.  (Fam.  Cucurbitaceae);  a  large,  
pubescent, climbing or trailing herb, cultivated throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Al¡bu, Tumb¢
Assam.:--
Beng.:Laus, Loki
Eng.:Bottle Gourd
Guj.:Dudi, Tumbadi
Hindi.:Lauki, Ghia
Kan..:Isugumbala, Tumbi
Kash.:--
Mal.:Chorakka, Churan, Choraikka, Piccura, Tumburini, Cura, Tumburu
Mar.:Phopla
Ori.:--
Punj.:Tumbi, Dani
Tam.:Shorakkai, Surai, Suraikkai
Tel.:Sorakaya, Anapakaya
Urdu.:Ghiya, Lauki
DESCRIPTION -
Macroscopic: 
Fruit a pepo, 30 - 60 cm long, bottle, mace or club-shaped, hard when ripe;  
external surface, smooth; pale green in colour. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more thanNilPer cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than12Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 10Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 25Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
 216 T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(85 : 15) shows under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.13 (light blue), 0.66  
(pink) and 0.88 (light pink). On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.13,  
0.33 and 0.57 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and  
heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C two spots appear at Rf. 0.13 and 0.57 (both  
light brown). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Saponin and Fatty Oil. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :H¤dya, Kaphahara, Pittahara, Rucikara, V¤Àya, Bhedaka 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Mah¡viÀagarbha Taila
THERAPEUTIC USES - Jvara, K¡sa, áv¡sa, ViÀa Roga, áopha, Vra¸a, á£la
DOSE - 10-20 ml. of fresh drug in juice form.
 217 98. Udumbara (Frt.)
UDUMBARA (Fruit)
Udumbara consists of dried fruit of  Ficus glomerata  Roxb. Syn.  F. racemosa 
Linn. (Fam. Moraceae); a large deciduous tree distributed throughout ever green forests  
in India, upto an elevation of I800 m, in moist localities and bank of streams, and also  
often planted in villages for shade and its edible fruits. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk:Jantuphala, Hemadugdh¡
Assam:Jambhaij, Jamij
Beng:Jogmadumur
Eng:Cluster Fig
Guj:Umardo
Hindi:Gullar, Gular, Umar
Kan:Athimaro
Kash:--
Mal:Atti
Mar:Umbar
Ori:Dumburi, Dumuri
Punj:Gullar, Umbra, Rumbn
Tam:Atti
Tel:Atti, Medi
Urdu:Goolar, Gular
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Dried syconus fruit, sub-globose with persistent peduncle; 1.0 -2.3 cm long, 0.7 -  
1.8 cm in dia., brownish-grey, wrinkled ostiole in apex region, inner hollow receptacle, a  
few  insect  debris  also  found  in  inner  walls  of  syconus;  odour,  not  distinct;  taste,  
astringent or acrid in unripe fruit. 
b)  Microscopic:
Fruit shows single layered epidermis covered with thick -cuticle having numerous  
unicellular hooked hairs and reddish-brown content; epidermis followed by 5-8 layers  
oval  to  polygonal,  collenchymatous  cells  and  oval  to  polygonal,  thin walled 
parenchymatous cells respectively; a few rosette crystals of calcium oxalate and reddish  
content found in collenchymatous cells; vascular traces, laticiferous cavities and pitted,  
round to oval lignified stone cells, with wide lumen present in parenchymatous zone. 
Powder - Brown; shows unicellular hooked hairs, epidermal cells and stone cells. 
 218 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than1Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than9Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 3Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 15Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9 : 1) shows under UV (366 nm) eight flourescent zones at Rf. 0.05 (light blue), 0.14  
(blue), 0.24 (light blue), 0.38 (light blue), 0.45 (light blue), 0.55 (blue), 0.93 (blue) and  
0.96 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour nine spots appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.24, 0.38, 0.45,  
0.51, 0.55, 0.65, 0.93 and 0.96 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric  
acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C nine spots appear at Rf. 0.05,  
0.24,0.38,0.45, 0.51,0.55,0.63,0.93 and 0.96 (all grey). 
CONSTITUENTS  – β-Sitosterol, Lupeol Acetate and Carbohydrates.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Kaphahara,  Pittahara,  Var¸ya  Ropa¸a,  Vra¸a  áodhana,  Bhagna  
Sandh¡naka, Raktado¿ahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Marma Gu¶ik¡
THERAPEUTIC USES - Raktapitta, M£rcch¡, D¡ha, T¤À¸¡, Pradara, Granthi Roga.
DOSE - 10-15 g. of the drug in powder form.
 219 99. Ushira (Rt.) 
UáIRË (Root)
U¿ir¡ consists of dried fragrant fibrous roots of  Vetiveria zizanioides  (Linn.) Nash 
(Fam. Poaceae); a densely tufted grass, found throughout the plains and lower hills of the  
country, especially on the banks of rivers and rich marshy soil, ascending to an altitude of  
1200 m. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk:V¢ra¸a, Ë·haya, Sevya
Assam:Usir, Virina
Beng:Venarramula, Khaskhas
Eng:Cuscus Grass
Guj:Sugandhi Valo, Valo
Hindi:Khasa, Gandar, Bena, Khas
Kan:Mudivala, Baladaberu, Lamanch, Bala Deberu
Kash:--
Mal:Ramaceam, Vetiver, Lamajja, Ramacham
Mar:Bala, Vala
Ori:Ushira, Benachera
Punj:Panni, Khas
Tam:Vetiver, Vilamichaver
Tel:Vetivelu, Vettiveru
Urdu:Khas
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Clusters of wiry roots upto 2 mm in diameter, minute, longitudinally grooved;  
colour varies from cream, grey or light yellow to brown; fracture, short and splintery;  
odour, strong aromatic; taste, slightly bitter. 
b)  Microscopic:
Root  shows  an  epidermis  consisting  of  tangentially  elongated  cells  having  
brownish content, followed by a layer of hypodermis, consisting of thin-walled cells,  
similar  to  epidermis;  cortex  consisting  of  2-3  layers  of  thick-walled,  lignified  
sclerenchymatous cells towards periphery and aerenchymatous cells towards centre;  
endoderm is, single layered of barrel-shaped cells with highly thickened inner walls;  
pericycle  many  layered  with  thick-walled,  sclerenchymatous  cells  enclosing  radial  
vascular bundles arranged in a ring; simple, round to oval, starch grains measuring 8-12  
µ in diameter present in aerenchyma, pericycle and pith cells. 
 220 IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than9Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than6Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 4Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
Volatile oil Not less than1Per cent, Appendix 2.2.10
T.L.C. -
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4:1 :5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.49 and  
0.72 (both blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.28, 0.75 and  
0.94 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic Sulphuric acid reagent and heating  
the plate at 105°C for ten minutes four spots appear at Rf. 0.19, 0.33, 0.73 and 0.94 (all  
grey).
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential Oil.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :P¡cana,  Pittaghna,  Stambhana,  V¡taghna,  Dabakl¡ntihara,  
Kaphapttah¤t 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - U¿¢rasava, Yogarajaguggulu, âa·anga Kv¡tha  
C£r¸a
THERAPEUTIC USES - Jvara, T¤À¸¡, M£trakrcchra, Vra¸a
DOSE - 3-6 g. of the drug in powder form for infusion
 221 100. Utpala (Fl.) 
UTPALA (Flower) 
Utpala consists of dried flower of Nymphaea stellata Willd. (Fam. Nymphaceae);  
an aquatic herb, generally found in tanks and ponds throughout the warmer parts of the  
country. 
SYNONYMS -
Sansk.:Kumuda, N¢lotpal
Assam.:--
Beng.:Kumud, Sundi
Eng.:Indian Blue Water Fily
Guj.:Poyanu
Hindi.:Neel Kamal, Kumudinee
Kan.:Neeltare
Kash.:--
Mal.:Ambal Poovu
Mar.:Kamoda, Neel Kamal
Ori.:--
Punj.:Neel Kamal, Kamalini
Tam.:Alli, Ambal
Tel.:Allitamara, Kaluvapoovu
Urdu.:Neelofar
DESCRIPTION -
a)  Macroscopic: 
Drug occurs mostly in broken form of varying sizes of dried pieces of flowers  
and buds, dark brown, attached with a pedicel of 0.5-1.0 cm long when present; sepals-5  
- 6 cm long, 1.5 - 2.0 cm wide, oblong, lanceolate, tip acute or subacute, free, adnate to  
base of disc; petals - 3.5 - 4.5 cm long 2.0-2.5 cm wide, linear-oblong or lanceolate,  
yellowish-brown; stamen- 6 to indefinite, free, adnate to fleshy thalamus; filaments-
dilated at base; anther - with lingual appendages, introrse, dithecous; gynoecium 3 to  
indefinite, enclosed by thalamus; style short; ovary unilocular. 
b)  Microscopic:
Sepal  -  Single  layered  epidermis  on  either  side,  unicellular  hairs  present  on  upper  
epidermis; both epidermis followed by 4-6 layers of collenchymatous cells with angular  
thickenings; central region occupied by 4-5 layers of elongated, thin-walled, spongy  
parenchymatous cells; large stellate air canals and vascular tissues present in this region;  
tanniniferous content present in collenchymatous cells. 
 222 Petal -Epidermis on either side, followed by 2-3 layers of collenchymatous cells, central  
region composed of 3-4 layers, elongated spongy parenchyma; stellate air canals and  
vascular  stellate  tissues  present  in  this  region;  tanniniferous  contents  also  found  
scattered in petals. 
Stamen - Single layered upper and lower epidermis, followed by 2-3 layers, rounded to  
oval, large parenchymatous cells; 3-4 layers elongated parenchymatous cells present in  
centre; stellate air canals present in this region; anther shows 4 splitting pollen chambers  
attached with parenchymatous connective tissues, vascular tissues and stellate idioblasts  
present  in  this  region,  endothecium  consisting  of  single  layered  columnar  cells,  
stromium in both the chambers and a few rounded 22 - 27 µ in dia., pollen grains having  
thick smooth, exine and a thin intine. 
Powder - Brown; shows groups of parenchymatous cells, stellate air canals, uniseriate  
hairs, yellowish-brown rounded pollen grains, measuring 22 - 27 µ in dia., having 'thick,  
smooth, exine and thin intine. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
Foreign matter Not more than2Per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2
Total ash Not more than8Per cent, Appendix 2.2.3
Acid-insoluble ash Not more than0.5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.4
Alcohol-soluble extractive Not less than 5Per cent, Appendix 2.2.6
Water-soluble extractive Not less than 22Per cent, Appendix 2.2.7
T.L.C. -
T.L.C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Chloroform  :  
Ethylacetate : Formic acid (5 : 4 : 1) shows in visible light three spots at Rf. 0.59, 0.68  
and 0.81 (all bluish grey). On spraying with 10% Ferric Chloride solution (aqueous) two  
spots appear at Rf. 0.68 and 0.81 (both blue and correspond to that of Tannic acid). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannins.  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Picchila, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Ke¿ya,  Medhya,  Pittan¡¿aka,  Rucya,  Ras¡yana,  Dahapausikara,  
D¡ha, Dradhykara, Raktapras¡dak. 
 
 223 IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - A¿ok¡riÀ¶a, Arvind¡sava, U¿¢r¡sava,  
Candan¡sava, Kaly¡naka Gh¤ta, Samang¡di C
£r¸a, Kanaka Taila, J¡ty¡di Taila, Tungadrum¡di  
Taila, Manjes¶h¡di Taila, Candan¡di Lauha,  
Triphal¡ Gh¤ta.
THERAPEUTIC USES - Pip¡s¡ D¡ha, Raktapitta, Chardi, M£rcch¡, H¤draoga, M£tra  
Kecchra, Jvar¡tis¡ra.
DOSE - 3-6 g. of the drug.
 224 THE AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA  
OF INDIA
PART- I
VOLUME – IV
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH
Contents   |   Monographs   |   Abbreviations   |   Appendices  
Legal Notices   |   General Notices
Note: This e-Book contains  Computer Database generated Monographs which are reproduced from official publication. The  
order of contents under the sections of Synonyms, Rasa, Guna, Virya, Vipaka, Karma, Formulations, Therapeutic uses may be 
shuffled, but the contents are same from the original source. However, in case of doubt, the user is advised to refer the official  
book.
i
CONTENTS
Legal Notices
General Notices
MONOGRAPHS
S.No Plant Name Botanical NamePage 
No.(as per book)
1ËÚHAKÌ (Seed) Cajanus cajan Linn 1
2AGARU (Heart Wood) Aquilaria agallocha Roxb. 4
3AKLËRI (Endosperm) Lodoicea maldivica Pers 6
4APARËJITË (Leaf) Clitoria ternatea Linn 8
5ËTMAGUPTA (Root) Mucuna prurita Hook. 10
6BILVA (Stem Bark) Aegle marmelos Corr 10
7CAMPAKA (Flower) Michelia champaca Linn 12
8CIØCË (Fruit Pulp) Tamarindus indical Linn 14
9DËÚIMA (Fresh Fruit) Punica granatum Linn 16
10DËÚIMA (Fruit Rind) Punica granatum Linn 18
11DËÚIMA (Leaf) Punica granatum Linn 19
12DEVADËRU (Heart Wood) Cedrus deodara ( Roxb.) Loud 23
13DHATTÍRA (Whole Plant) Datura metal Linn 25
14DÍRVA (Whole Plant) Cynodon dactylon (Linn) 28
15GAMBHËRÌ (Stem Bark) Gmelina arborea Linn 31
16IKâU (Root Stock) Saccharum officinarum Linn 33
17KADALÌ (Flower) Musa paradisiacal Linn 35
18KARCÍRA (Rhizome) Curcuma zedoaria Rosc 37
19KASTÍRÌLATIKË  (Seed) Hibiscus abelmoschus Linn 39
20KATAKA (Seed) Strychnos potatorum Linn.f 41
21KHARJURA (Dried Fruit) Phoenix dactylifera 43
22KHARJURA (Fresh Fruit) Phoenix dactylifera 45
ii23KÎâÛASËRIVË (Root)Cryptolepis buchanani Roem &  
Schult 47
24KUNDURU (Exudate) Boswellia serrata Roxb 50
25KUNKUMA (Style and Stigma) Crocus sativus Linn 52
26KÍSMËNÚA (Fruit) Benincasa hispida (Thunb)Cogn. 55
27MADAYANTÌ (Leaf) Lawsonia inermis Linn 57
28MAHËNIMBA (Stem Bark) Melia azedarach Linn 59
29MANDÍKAPARÛI (Whole Plant) Centella asiatica (Linn.) Urban. 61
30MËYYAKU (Gall) Quercus infectoria Oliv. 64
31MUDGAPARÛI(Whole Plant) Vigna trilobata (Linn) Verdc. 67
32MUNDÌTAKË (Whole Plant) Sphaeranthus indicus Linn 70
33NYAGRODHA JAÙA  (Aerial  
Root)Ficus bengalensis Linn73
34NIMBÍ  (Fresh Fruit) Citrus limon (Lilnn) Burm .f 75
35NIRGUNÚI (Root) Vitex negundo Linn 76
36PALAáA ( Flower) Butea monosperma (Lam ) Kuntze 78
37PALAáA (Gum) Butea monosperma (Lam ) Kuntze 80
38PALAáA (Seed) Butea monosperma (Lam ) Kuntze 82
39PARPAÙA  (Whole Plant) Fumaria parviflora Lam 84
40PËÙALAI   (Stem Bark)Stereospermum chelonoides (L.F)  
DC 87
41PAÙÙA×GA (Heart Wood) Caesalpina sappan Linn 89
42PIPPALI (Fruit) Piper Longum Linn 91
43PLAKâA (Fruit) Ficus lacor Buch- ham 93
44PRIYËLA (Stem Bark) Buchnania lanzan Spreng 95
45PRIYA×GU (Fruit) Callicarpa macrophylla Vahl. 97
46PÎáNIPARÛI(Whole Plant) Uraria picta Desv. 99
47PUâKARA (Root) Inula racemosa Hook.f 102
iii48RUDRËKâA (Seed)Elaeocarpus sphaericus Gaertn.  
K.Schum 104
49SARJA (Exudate) Vateria indica Linn 106
50áATËVARI (Root) Asparagus racemosus Willd 108
51áIGRU (Root Bark) Moringa oleifera Lam 110
52áIGRU (Seed) Moringa oleifera Lam 112
53áIGRU (Stem Bark) Moringa oleifera Lam 114
54áR×GËÙAKA (Dried Seed) Trapa natas Linn 116
55SRUVAVÎKâA (Leaf) Flacourtia indica Merr. 120
56SRUVAVÎKâA (Stem Bark) Flacourtia indica Merr. 122
57TËLAMÍLI (Rhizome) Curculigo orchioides Gaertn 124
58TËLÌáA (Leaves) Abiea webbiana Lindl 126
59TILA (Seed) Sesamum indicum linn 128
60TULASI (Seed) Ocimum sanctum Linn 128
61TUMBURU (Fruit) Zanthoxylum armatum DC 130
62UÙI×GANA (Seed)Blepharis persica ( Burm.f)  
O.Kuntze 132
63VËRËHI (Rhizome) Dioscorea bulbifera Linn 134
64VARâËBHU (Root) Trianthema portulacastrum Linn 136
65VËSË  (Root) Adhatoda zeylanica Medic 138
66VIâAMUâÙHI (Seed) Strychnus nuxvomica Linn 140
67VÎáCIKËLI (Whole Plant) Tragia involucrate Linn 143
68YAVA (Whole Plant) Hordeum vulgare Linn 146
ivAppendix-1
1.1 Apparatus for Tests and Assays
1.1.1-Nessler Cylinder.
1.1.2-Sieves
1.1.3-Thermometers
1.1.4-Volumetric Glassware
1.1.5- Weights and Balances
Appendix-2
2.1 Testing Drugs
2.1.1- Systematic Study of Crude Drugs
2.1.2- Microscopic methods of Examining Crude Vegetable Drugs
2.1.3- Types of Stomata 
2.1.4-Determination of Stomatal Index
2.1.5-Determination of Palisade Ratio
2.1.6-Determination of Vein –Islet Number
2.1.7-Determination of Stomatal Number
2.2 Determination of Quantitative Data of Vegetable Drugs
2.2.1 - Sampling of drugs
2.2.2 - Foreign Matter and Determination of Foreign matter
2.2.3 - Determination of Total Ash 
2.2.4 - Determination of Acid Insoluble Ash 
2.2.5 - Determination of Water Soluble Ash
2.2.6 - Determination of Alcohol soluble Extractive
2.2.7 - Determination of Water Soluble Extractive
2.2.8 - Determination o of Ether Soluble Extractive (Fixed Oil Content)
2.2.9 - Determination of Moisture Content (Loss on Drying)
2.2.10 - Determination of Volatile Oil in Drugs
2.2.11 - Special Processes used in Alkaloidal Assays
2.2.11-a - Continuous Extraction of Drugs
2.2.11-b - Tests for Complete Extraction of Alkaloids
2.2.12 - Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC)
2.3 Limit Tests
2.3.1- Limit Test for Arsenic
2.3.2-Limit Test for Chlorides
2.3.3-Limit Test for Heavy Metals
2.3.4-Limit Test for Iron 
2.3.5 - Limit Test for lead
2.3.6-Sulphated Ash
2.3.7-Limit Test for Sulphates
vAppendix-3
3.1 Physical Tests and determinations
3.1.1-Powder Fineness
3.1.2-Refractive Index
3.1.3-Weight per milliliter and Specific Gravity 
Appendix-4
4.1 Reagents and Solutions
Appendix-5
5.1. Weights and Measures
5.2. Approximate Equivalents of Doses in Indian System and Metric System
Appendix- 6
6.1 Classical Ayurvedic References
Index
English equivalents of Ayurvedic clinical conditions and diseases 
viLEGAL NOTICES
In India there are laws dealing with drugs that are the subject of monographs  
which follow. These monographs should be read subject to the restrictions imposed  
by these laws wherever they are applicable.
It is expedient that enquiry be made in each case in order to ensure that the  
provisions of the law are being complied with.
In general, the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 (subsequently amended in 1964  
and 1982), the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 and the Poisons Act, 1919 and the rules  
framed thereunder should be consulted.
              Under the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India  
(A.P.I.), Part-I, Vol. IV, is the book of standards for single drugs included therein and  
the standards prescribed in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, Part-I, Vol. IV  
would be official. If considered necessary these standards can be amended and the  
Chairman of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee authorised to issue such  
amendments.  Whenever  such  amendments  are  issued  the  Ayurvedic  
Pharmacopoeia of India, Part-I, Vol. IV, would be deemed to have been amended  
accordingly.
viiGENERAL NOTICES
Title - The title of the book is “ Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of 
Name of the Drugs - The name given on the top of each monograph of the drug is in  
Sanskrit as mentioned in the  Ayurvedic classics and/or in the  Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India , Part-I and Part-II will be considered official. These names have been arranged in  
English alphabetical order. The Latin name (taxonomical nomenclature) of each drug as  
found  in authentic  scientific  literature has  been provided  in the monograph  in  the  
introductory paragraph. The official name will be the main title of the drug and its  
scientific name will also be considered as legal name.
Introductory Para  - Each monograph begins with an introductory paragraph indicating  
the part, scientific name of the drug in Latin with short description about its habit,  
distribution and method of collection, if any.
Synonyms - Synonyms of each drug appearing in each monograph in Sanskrit, English,  
Hindi, Urdu and other Indian regional languages have been mentioned as found in the  
classical texts,  Ayurvedic Formulary of India, Part-I and Part-II as procured from the  
experts, scholars of Ayurveda and officials in the field from different states.
Italics - Italic type has been used for scientific name of the drug appearing in the  
introductory  paragraph  of  each  monograph  as  also  for  chemicals  and  reagents,  
substances or processes described in Appendix.
Odour and Taste - Wherever a specific odour has been found it has been mentioned  
but the description as ‘ odourless’ or ‘no odour’ has in many cases been avoided in the  
description,  as large numbers of drugs have got no specific  odour. The “odour” is 
examined by directly smelling 25 g of the powdered drug contained in a package or  
freshly powdered. If the odour is discernible the sample is rapidly transferred to an open  
container and re-examined after 15 minutes. If the odour persists to be discernible, it is  
described as having odour.
The “Taste” of a drug is examined by taking a small quantity of 85 mesh powder  
by a tip of moist glass rod and applying it on tongue previously rinsed with water. This  
may not be done in case if poisonous drugs, indicated in monograph.
Mesh Number - Wherever the powdering of the drug has been required the sieve “Mesh  
Number 85” has been used. This will not apply for drugs containing much oily substance.  
Weights and Measures -  The metric system of weights and measures is employed.  
Weights are given in multiples or fractions of a gramme (g) or of a milligram (mg). Fluid  
measures are given in multiples or fractions of millilitre (ml).
When the term “drop” is used, the measurement is to be made by means of a  
tube, which delivers in 20 drops 1 gram of distilled water at 15oC.
Metric measures are required by the Pharmacopoeia to be graduated at 20oC and 
all  measurements  involved  in  the  analytical  operations  of  the  Pharmacopoeia  are  
intended, unless otherwise stated to be made at that temperature.
Identity, Purity and Strength - Under the heading “Identification” tests are provided  
as an aid to identification and are described in their respective monographs.
viiiThe term “Foreign Matter” is used to designate any matter, which does not form  
part of the drug as defined in the monograph. Vegetable drugs used as such or in  
formulations, should be duly identified and authenticated and be free from insects,  
pests, fungi, micro-organisms, pesticides, and other animal matter including animal  
excreta, be within the permitted and specified limits for lead, arsenic and heavy metals,  
and  show  no  abnormal  odour,  colour,  sliminess,  mould  or  other  evidence  of  
deterioration.
The  quantitative  tests  e.g.  total  ash,  acid-insoluble  ash,  water-soluble  ash,  
alcohol-soluble extractive, water- soluble extractive, ether-soluble extractive, moisture  
content, volatile oil content and assays are the methods upon which the standards of  
Pharmacopoeia  depend.  The  methods  for  assays  are  described  in  their  respective  
monographs and for other quantitative tests, methods are not repeated in the text of  
monographs but only the corresponding reference of appropriate appendix is given. The  
analyst is not precluded from employing an alternate method in any instance if he is  
satisfied  that  the  method,  which  he  uses,  will  give  the  same  result  as  the  
Pharmacopoeial Method.  In  suitable  instances  the  methods  of  microanalysis,  if  of  
equivalent accuracy, may be substituted for the tests and assays described. However, in  
the event of doubt or dispute the methods of analysis of the Pharmacopoeia are alone  
authoritative.
Limits for Heavy Metals  – All Ayurvedic Drugs (Single/Compound formulation) must  
comply with the limits for Heavy Metals prescribed in individual Monograph and wherever  
limit is not given then they must comply with the limits given in WHO publication  
“Quality Control Methods for Medicinal Plants and Material”.
Standards - For statutory purpose, statements appearing in the API, Part-I, Vol. V,  
under Description, those of definition of the part and source plants, and Identity, Purity  
and Strength, shall constitute standards. 
Thin Layer Chromatography ( T.L.C.) - Under this head, wherever given, the number  
of spots and Rf values of the spots with their colour have been mentioned as a guide for  
identification of the drug and not as Pharmacopoeial requirement. However, the analyst  
may use any other solvent system and detecting reagent in any instance if he is satisfied  
that the method which he uses, even by applying known reference standards, will give  
better result to establish the identity of any particular chemical constituent reported to  
be present in the drug.
Quantities to be weighed for Assays and Tests - In all description quantity of the  
substance to be taken for testing is indicated. The amount stated is approximate but the  
quantity actually used must be accurately weighed and must not deviate by more than  
10 per cent from the one stated.
Constant Weight -  the term “Constant Weight” when it refers to drying or ignition  
means that two consecutive weighings do not differ by more than 1.0 mg per g of the  
substance taken for the determination, the second weighing following an additional hour  
of drying on further ignition.
Constituents - Under this head only the names of important chemical constituents,  
groups of constituents reported in research publications have been mentioned as a guide  
and not as pharmacopoeial requirement.
Percentage of Solutions -  In defining standards, the expression per cent (%), is used,  
according to circumstances, with one of the four meanings given below.
Per cent w/w (percentage weight in weight) expresses the number of grammes of 
active substance, in 100 grammes of product.        
ixPer cent w/v (Percentage weight in volume) expresses the number of grammes of 
active substance in 100 millilitres of product.        
Per cent v/v (percentage volume in volume) expresses the number of millilitres of 
active substance in 100 millilitres of product.        
         Per cent v/w (percentage volume in weight) expresses the number of  
millilitres of active substance in 100 grammes of product. 
Percentage of alcohol - All statements of percentage of alcohol ( C2H5OH) refer 
to percentage by volume at 15.56 oC.        
Temperature - Unless otherwise specified all temperatures refer to centigrade ( celsius), 
thermometric scale.
Solutions - Unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph, all solutions are  
prepared with purified water.
Reagents  and  Solutions  -  The  chemicals  and  reagents  required  for  the  test  in  
Pharmacopoeia are described in Appendices.
Solubility - When stating the solubilities of Chemical substances the term “Soluble” is  
necessarily sometimes used in a general sense irrespective of concomitant chemical  
changes.
Statements of solubilities, which are expressed as a precise relation of weights of  
dissolved substance of volume of solvent, at a stated temperature, are intended to apply  
at that temperature. Statements of approximate  solubilities for which no figures are  
given, are intended to apply at ordinary room temperature.         
Pharmacopoeial chemicals when dissolved may show slight physical impurities,  
such as fragment of filter papers, fibres, and dust particles, unless excluded by definite  
tests in the individual monographs.
When the expression “parts” is used in defining the solubility of a substance, it is  
to be understood to mean that 1 gramme of a solid or 1 millilitre of a liquid is soluble in  
that number of millilitres of the solvent represented by the stated number of parts.
When  the  exact  solubility  of  pharmacopoeial substance  is  not  known,  a  
descriptive term is used to indicate its solubility. 
xThe following table indicates the meaning of such terms :-
Descriptive terms Relative quantities of solvent  
Very soluble Less than 1 part
Freely soluble From 1 to 10 parts
Soluble From 10 to 30 parts
Sparingly soluble From 30 to 100 parts
Slightly soluble From 100 to 1000 parts
Very slightly soluble From 1000 to 10,000 parts
Practically insoluble More than 10,000 parts
Therapeutic  uses  and  important  formulations  –Therapeutic  uses and important  
formulations  mentioned  in  this  Pharmacopoeia  are,  as  provided  in  the  recognised 
Ayurvedic classics and in the Ayurvedic Formulary of India, Part –I and Part-II.
Doses – The doses mentioned in each monograph are in metric system of weights,  
which are the approximate conversions from classical weights mentioned in Ayurvedic  
texts. A conversion table is appended giving classical weights of Ayurvedic System of  
Medicine with their metric equivalents. Doses mentioned in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia  
of  India  (A.P.I.)  are  intended  merely  for  general  guidance  and  represent,  unless  
otherwise stated, the average range of quantities per dose which is generally regarded  
suitable by clinicians for adults only when administered orally.   
     
    It is to be noted that the relation between doses in metric and  Ayurvedic 
systems set forth in the text is of approximate equivalence. These quantities are for  
convenience of prescriber and sufficiently accurate for pharmaceutical purposes.
         The abbreviations commonly employed are as follows:                                         
      
Abbreviations of technical terms
m. Metre
l. Litre
mm. Millimetre
cm. Centimetre
µ. Micron (0.001 mm)
Kg. Kilogram
g. Gramme
mg. Milligram
ml. Millilitre
IN. Normal solution
0.5 N. Half-normal solution
0.1 N. Decinormal solution
1M. Molar solution
Fam. Family
PS. Primary Standards
TS. Transverse Section
xiAbbreviations used for Languages
Sansk. Sanskrit
Assam. Assamese
Beng. Bengali
Eng. English
Guj. Gujrati
Kan. Kannada
Kash. Kashmiri
Mal. Malayalam
Mar. Marathi
Ori. Oriya
Punj. Punjabi
Tam. Tamil
Tel. Telugu
ABBREVIATIONS FOR PARTS OF PLANTS
Cotyledon Cotldn.
Flower Fl.
Fruit Fr.
Heart Wood Ht. Wd.
Leaf Lf.
Pseudo-bulb Pseudo-bulb
Root Bark Rt. Bk.
Root Rt.
Rhizome Rz.
Seed Sd.
Stem Bark St. Bk.
Stem St.
Tuberous Root Tub. Rt.
Wood Wd.
Whole Plant Wh. Pl.
xii1. Adhaki (Sd.)  
ËÚHAKÌ (Seed) 
Ë·hak¢ consists of dried seed of  Cajanus cajan  Linn. (Fam. Fabaceae), an erect  
shrub 1.5 to 3 m high, cultivated nearly throughout the country as a pulse crop. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Tuvari 
Assamese:Ruharmah 
Bengali:Arhar 
English:Pigeon Pea 
Gujrati  :Tuver 
Hindi    :Arhar 
Kannada:Togari 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Thuvara 
Marathi:Toor 
Oriya   :Harada, Kandulagachha 
Punjabi:Arhar 
Tamil   :Adagi Tuvari, Thuvarai, Tuvarai 
Telugu  :Kandulu 
Urdu    :Arhar 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seed rounded to oval, 0.4 to 0.7 cm dia., having a white hilum; varying in colour  
from yellow and red to brown; odour and taste not distinct.
 
b) Microscopic 
Seed coat shows single layered, radially elongated, palisade-like, thin-walled  
cells, covered externally by striated cuticle and internally supported by a single layered  
bearer cells, followed by 8 to 10 layers of tangentially elongated, elliptical, thin-walled,  
parenchymatous  cells;  cotyledon  composed  of  oval  to  polygonal,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells most of them containing groups of simple, rounded to oval starch  
grains, measuring 5 to 36 µ in dia. 
Powder- Light brown; seed coat in surface view shows polygonal, thin-walled cells with  
intercellular spaces; groups of oval to polygonal, parenchymatous cells, and rounded to  
oval starch grains measuring 5 to 36 µ in dia. 
1IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Protein content                         Not less than     20   per cent              - 
                                                       (as determined by following method)              
Method:
Determination of Total Nitrogen:-
Place an appropriate amount of the substance, accurately weighed, in a 500 ml  
Kjeldahl's flask of hard glass. The material to be tested, if solid or semi-solid, may be  
wrapped in a sheet of nitrogen free filter paper for convenience in transferring it into the  
flask. Add 10 g of powdered potassium sulphate, 0.5 g of powdered copper sulphate and  
30 ml of nitrogen free sulphuric acid. Incline the flask at an angle of about 45 ° and 
gently heat the mixture, keeping the temperature below the boiling point of the mixture  
until frothing has ceased. Increase the heat until the acid boils and continue the heating  
for four hrs until the solution acquires a clear greenish colour. Allow the mixture to cool,  
add 150 ml of water, thoroughly mix the contents of the flask and cool again. Add  
cautiously, so as to cause the solution to flow down inside the flask to form a layer under  
the acid solution, 100 ml of a 30 % w/v solution of sodium hydroxide in water. Add a  
few pieces of granulated zinc, and connect the flask by means of kjeldahl connecting  
bulb with a condenser, the delivery tube from which dips beneath the surface of a  
mixture of 30 ml of 0.5 N HCl or 0.5 N H 2S04 and 25 ml of water contained in an  
Erlenmeyer flask or a wide mouthed bottle of about 500 ml capacity. Mix the contents of  
the flask by gentle rotation, and distil until about two thirds of the contents of the flask  
have distilled over. Add about 3 drops of solution of methyl red to the contents of the  
receiving  vessel  and  determine  the  excess  of  acid  by  titration  with  0.5  N  sodium  
hydroxide. Repeat the experiment with the same quantities of reagents and in the same  
manner, but omitting the substance under test. The difference between the two titrations  
represent the acid required to neutralize the ammonia. Each ml of 0.5 N hydrochloric  
acid or 0.5 N Sulphuric acid is equivalent to 0.007004 g of N.
When the nitrogen content of the substance under test is known to be low, 0.5 N  
hydrochloric or 0.5 N sulphuric acid may be replaced by 0.1N hydrochloric acid or 0.1 N  
sulphuric acid and 0.1 N sodium hydroxide should then be used in titrating the excess  
acid. Each ml of 0.1 N hydrochloric acid or 0.1 N sulphuric acid is equivalent to  
0.001401 g of N
Total Protein =Total Nitrogen X 6.25. 
 
2T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' using Toluene: Ethyl  
acetate (90: 10) shows under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.11, 0.23,  
0.30 and 0.40 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.23,  
0.30 and 0.96 (all yellow). 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara,  M®d°hara,  Pittakara,  Sangrahi,  V¡takara,  Var¸ya,  
ViÀapaha, Stanyav¤ddhi 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - K¡nk¡yana Gu¶ika 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - K¡na Atisthaulya, Raktavik¡ra, Raktapitta, Vi¿ar°ga, Sthaulya,  
M®·°r°ga, Ar¿a 
DOSE  - As directed by the physician 
   
  
32. Agaru (Ht.Wd.)  
AGARU (Heart Wood)  
Agaru  consists  of  dried  heart  wood  of  Aquilaria  agallocha  Roxb.  (Fam. 
Thymelacaceae), a large evergreen tree, distributed in North East part of the country.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Aguru, Lauha, K¤mija 
Assamese:Agaru 
Bengali:Agaru, Agarkashtha, Agar Chandan 
English:Eagle Wood 
Gujrati  :Agar 
Hindi    :Agar 
Kannada:Krishna Agaru 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Akil 
Marathi:Agar 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Ooda, ooda, pharsi 
Tamil   :Akil kattai 
Telugu  :Agaru 
Urdu    :Ood Hindi, Agar 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug available in cut pieces, dark brown to nearly black; fracture, hard; no  
characteristic smell and taste.
b) Microscopic 
Shows mostly uniseriate sometimes biseriate xylem rays; vessels isolated having  
simple pitted thickening and filled with dark brown contents; xylem fibres short having  
narrow lumen occupying a major portion of wood; xylem parenchyma less in number  
and simple pitted; included phloem tissues in pockets partially disorganised, leaving  
large circular or oval holes, containing collapsed and broken tissues. 
Powder - Dark brown; shows numerous aseptate fibres, simple pitted vessels with dark  
brown contents.
4IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   13   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     1    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9:1) shows in visible light two spots at Rf. 0.17 and 0.27 (both light brown). Under  
U.V. (366 nm) five fluorescent zones appear at Rf. 0.17, 0.27, 0.36, 0.57 and 0.80 (all  
blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots appear at Rf. 0.05, 0.11, 0.15, 0.24,  
0.33, 0.57, 0.73 and 0.80 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent  
and after heating the plate for ten minutes at 105 °C five spots appear at Rf. 0.13, 0.18,  
0.25, 0.37 and 0.59 (all violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential Oil
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :áirovir®cana, Kaphahara, Pittalam, Tvacya, V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Madhukasava,  M¤dv¢k¡sava,  Karpuradyarka,  
Cyavanapr¡¿a  Aval®ha,  A¸u Taila,  Candan¡di  
Taila,  Khadir¡di  Gutika,  Sva¿ahara  Ka¿aya  C
£rna, Guducy¡di Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - AkÀir°ga, áv¡sa, Kar¸a R°ga, KuÀ¶ha, Vi¿a 
DOSE  - 1-3g 
   
  
53. Aklari (Endm.)  
AKLËRI (Endosperm) 
Akl¡ri consists of dried endosperm of  Lodoicea maldivica  Pers. Syn.  L. seychel 
larum  Labill. (Fam. Arecaceae), a tall, dioecious palm with straight, smooth, annulated  
trunk, 18 to 30 m high and 0.3 m dia, growing on all types of soils from the sandy shore to  
the arid mountain top and also cultivated in India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Samudra N¡rik®½a 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Narikel, Jora Narikel 
English:Double coconut 
Gujrati  :Dorai Nareal 
Hindi    :Dari yai Nariyal 
Kannada:Joditengu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Aklari 
Marathi:Dariyacha Naral 
Oriya   :Samudra Narikela 
Punjabi:Dariyai Nariyal 
Tamil   :Thunga, Kadal Thengai 
Telugu  :Samudra Tenkaya Kohari 
Urdu    :Narjeel Daryaee 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in varying sizes, about 2.0 cm thick; very hard having much the  
appearance and texture of vegetable ivory; outer surface moderately rough to smooth,  
dark brown in colour; inner surface rough, dirty white in colour with number of small  
tooth-like projections, when soaked in water it softens a little and can be split into thin  
fibrous bundles; fracture, very hard; odour and taste not characteristic. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Testa shows 4 to 6 layers of polygonal, tangentially elongated, lignified, thick-
walled cells filled with reddish-brown contents, followed by a wide zone of oval to  
polygonal, thick-walled cells; endosperm consists of spindle-shaped cells with thick  
walls having a central lumen with club-shaped canals extending to the cell wall; a few  
simple starch grains present in endosperm measuring 13 to 18  µ in dia., and small  
minute aleurone grains; oil globules present throughout the region. 
6Powder - Dirty brown; shows thick-walled, elongated, spindle-shaped endosperm cells,  
moderately thick-walled, polygonal, slightly wavy cells of testa in surface view, a few  
of them containing oil globules and small minute aleurone grains and simple starch  
grains measuring 13 to 18 µ in dia.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.4  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     0.3  per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     4     per cent, Appendix   2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic acid:  
Water (4:1:5) v/v shows under UV (366 nm) one fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.94 (blue). On  
exposure to Iodine vapour four spots appear at Rf. 0.40, 0.60, 0.77 and 0.94 (all yellow).  
On spraying with 60% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 120 °C 
for ten minutes two spots appear at Rf. 0.31 (brown) and 0.94 (dark brown). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sugars and Sterols. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara,  V¡tahara,  H¤dya,  ViÀaghna,  T¤À¸anigraha¸a,  á
¢tapra¿amana, Agnidiptikara 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  G°r°can¡di  Va¶i,  M¤tasaµj¢vani  Gu¶ika,  Javahara  
Mohara 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - ViÀucika, H¤dr°ga, á¢ta Jvara 
DOSE  - 5-10 gm of the drug in the powder form 
   
  
74. Aparajita (Lf.)  
APARËJITË (Leaf) 
Apar¡jit¡  consists  of  dried  leaf  of  Clitoria  ternatea  Linn.  (Fam.  Fabaceae),  a  
perennial twining climber common all over the tropical parts of country being cultivated  
and also found wild, growing over hedges and thickets
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Girikar¸ika 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Aparajita 
English:Winged-leaved clitoria 
Gujrati  :Garnee 
Hindi    :Aparajita, Koyal 
Kannada:Girikarnike 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Shankhpushpam 
Marathi:Gokarnee 
Oriya   :Aparajita 
Punjabi:Aparajita 
Tamil   :Kakkanam 
Telugu  :Dintena, Sankupushpam 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug generally occurs in the form of leaves and leaflets, rachis broken with or  
without  intact  leaflets;  leaflet  with  small  petiolule,  ovate  or  elliptic  oblong,  rarely  
roundish, obtuse, entire, glabrous or with a few short appressed hairs, subcoriaceous,  
base obtuse or acute; 2.5 to 5.0 cm long, 1.8 to 3.0 cm wide, yellowish-green; no odour  
or taste. 
b) Microscopic 
Rachis-  shows single layered epidermis externally covered with thick, smooth cuticle;  
uni to tricellular, hooked hair with warty cuticle, found on epidermis of either side;  
vascular bundle crescent shaped consisting of xylem and phloem; pericycle present in  
the form of broken ring; rest of the tissues between epidermis and pericycle composed of  
oval to polygonal, thin-walled, 3 to 5 layered, parenchymatous cells. 
Leaflet - shows dorsiventral structure; both upper and lower epidermis consists of single  
layered  cells,  covered  externally  with  thick  cuticle;  some  epidermal  cells  of  both  
8surfaces elongate outwards forming uni to tri-cellular warty hairs, basal cells smaller and  
apical cells longer; palisade single layered; palisade ratio 3 or 4; spongy parenchyma 4  
or 5 layered with intercellular spaces and containing a few prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate; stomata paracytic, present on both surfaces; stomatal index 58 to 64 on lower  
surface, 31 to 42 on upper surface; vein islet number 22 to 24; veinlet terminal number  
34 to 37 per sq. mm. 
Powder - Yellowish-green; shows groups of spongy parenchyma, palisade cells, fibres,  
xylem vessels with spiral thickenings, fragments of hairs with or without warty cuticle,  
wavy thin-walled, epidermal cells with paracytic stomata in surface view. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   15   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel "G" plate using n-Butanol :  
Acetic Acid: Water (4:1:5) shows under UV (366 nm) three spots at Rf. 0.34 (violet).  
0.59 (blue) 0.93 (red). On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.29. 0.54  
and 0.93 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and  
heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes three spots appear at Rf. 0.25 (brown), 0.35  
(grey). and 0.59 (yellow). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycosides - Flavonal glycosides and Resin glycosides
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :M®dhya,  Kanthya,  CakÀusya,  Pitt°padravana¿ini,  Trid°Àa  á¡maka,  
Visapaha, Garahaghni 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - V¡ta Rakt¡ntaka Rasa 
 
9THERAPEUTIC USES   - á£la, áotha, Ardhavabhedaka, Bhrama, D¡ha, Ëmad°¿a, Graha  
B¡dha, Jvara, K¡sa, KuÀ¶ha, Ma£trad°Àa, Rakt¡t¢sara, Sv¡¿a,  
Unm¡da, ViÀa, Vra¸a, Vamana. 
DOSE  - Root powder 1-3gSeed powder 1-3 gLeaf powder 2-5 g 
   
  
105. Atmagupta (Rt.) 
ËTMAGUPTA (Root) 
Ëtmagupta  consists of dried root of Mucuna prurita Hook. Syn. M. pruriens (L.) 
DC. (Fam. Fabaceae), a herbaceous twining annual found wild almost all over the country  
and in Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Kapikacchu, Markai, Kandura, á£ka¿imbi, Kapiprabha 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Aalkushee, Alkusa 
English:Cowhage, Cowitch 
Gujrati  :Kaucha, Kavach 
Hindi    :Kevanch, Kaunch, Khujanee 
Kannada:Nasukunnee, Nasuganni, Nayisonanguballi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Shoriyanam, Naykkorana, Naykkuran 
Marathi:Khajkuhilee 
Oriya   :Baikhujnee 
Punjabi:Aalkushee, Kavanch 
Tamil   :Punaik-Kalee, Punaikkalee, Punaippidukkam 
Telugu  :Piliyadugu, Pillee adugu 
Urdu    :Kaunch  
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root long, 7 mm or more in thickness, hard, having lateral roots, dark brown to  
black; fracture, fibrous; odour and taste not distinct.
b) Microscopic 
Root shows a narrow cork consisting of 4 or 5 rows of tangentially elongated  
cells; secondary cortex narrow consisting of 2 to 5 rows of thin-walled, parenchymatous  
cells, a few containing brownish contents; secondary phloem wide, forming bulk of the  
bark  in  the  form  of  long,  radial  strips  that  are  conical  due  to  the  medullary  rays  
funneling out in the phloem region; phloem fibres are arranged in groups or occasionally  
single; phloem rays uni to biseriate; cambium distinct 1 or 2 layered; secondary xylem  
very wide composed of usual elements, vessels large as well as small, surrounded by  
xylem  parenchyma and  fibres;  medullary rays  in  the  xylem  also  mostly  uniseriate,  
somewhat wavy, consisting of radially elongated thin-walled cells. 
11Powder - Grey to dark brown; shows fragments of cork, fibres singly or groups and xy -
lem vessels.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4:1:5) shows under UV (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.33, 0.51,  
0.66 and 0.86 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.10,  
0.20, 0.38, 0.48, 0.59, 0.77 and 0.86 (all yellow). On spraying with Ninhydrin and on  
heating the plate at 110o  C for ten minutes four conspicuous spots appear at Rf. 0.38,  
0.48, 0.59 and 0.86 (all light pink). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Choline
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¤Àya, B¤Æhana, Balya, Y°nisamk¢rnakara, V¡j
¢karana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  (No Formulations)
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - á¢ta Pitta, K¤Àata, Pakv¡t¢s¡ra, Raktapitta, V¡tavy¡dhi, Yoni  
áithilata, ÚuÀta Vra¸a, KuÀ¶ha 
DOSE  - 3-6 g of the drug in the powder form for decoction 
   
  
126. Bilva (St.Bk)  
BILVA (Stem Bark) 
Bilva consists of dried stem bark of  Aegle marmelos  Corr. (Fam. Rutaceae), an  
armed, medium sized tree occurring in the plains and upto 1000 m in the hills as well as  
cultivated throughout the country, particularly in sacred groves. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:ár¢phala 
Assamese:Bael, Vael 
Bengali:Bela, Bilva 
English:Bengal Quince, Bael 
Gujrati  :Bill, Bilum 
Hindi    :Bela, Sriphal, Bel 
Kannada:Bilva 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Koovalam 
Marathi:Bel, Baela 
Oriya   :Bela 
Punjabi:Bil 
Tamil   :Vilvam 
Telugu  :Maredu 
Urdu    :Belgiri, (Bael) 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark occurs as pieces of about 0.5 to 1 cm thick, flat or channelled; surface rough  
and warty due to a number of lenticels, ridges and furrows; fracture tough, gritty in outer  
and fibrous in inner region; odour and taste, not characteristic.
b) Microscopic 
Cork  stratified,  tangentially  elongated,  lignified,  with  four  to  eight  bands  
alternating with smaller cells of 2 to 16 layers and larger cells of 2 to 20 layers;  
secondary cortex wide, consisting of parenchyma, and a large number of groups of, or  
some times single, thick walled, lignified, stone cells showing transverse striations due  
to radiating canals; smaller ones 16 to 64 µ wide and 48 to 160 µ long and larger ones  
32 to 110 µ wide and 160 to 640 µ long; secondary phloem consisting of fibres, sieve  
elements and crystal fibre, traversed by phloem rays; phloem fibres long, tapering,  
sharply pointed to blunt; fibre groups arranged in rings; phloem rays uni to triseriate,  
biseriate rays being more common, uniseriate rays 3 to 6 cells high, while biseriate rays  
6 to 25 cells high. 
13Powder - Yellowish; fragments of rectangular elongated, lignified cork cells; pieces of  
fibres  with  pointed  or  blunt  ends;  sieve  elements  and  crystals  fibre  pieces;  uni  to  
biseriate phloem rays; lignified, thick-walled stone cells in groups or singly, with narrow  
lumen showing striations and measuring 16 to 640 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethyl acetate  
(95:5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) five fluorescent spots at Rf. 0.07 (greenish blue), 0.14  
(greenish blue), 0.25, 0.39 and 0.67 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour three spots  
appear at Rf. 0.14, 0.25 and 0.97 (all yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent one  
spot appears at Rf. 0.25 (orange). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Coumarins and Sterols. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittakara, V¡tahara, D¢paniya, Sa´gr¡hi, Vi¿aghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - A¸u Taila, Pu¿y¡nuga C£r¸a, Grahani Mihira T¡ila,  
Sudar¿ana Cur¸a, Candn¡di Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - á£la, M®·°r°ga, V¡tavy¡dhi, Chardi, á°tha, Atis¡ra, Rakt¡tis¡ra,  
Kuk¿i¿£la, Ëma¿ula, ArÀa, Graha¸ir°ga, Madhum®ha, Prav¡hika 
DOSE  - 15-30 ml 
   
  
147. Champaka (Fl.)  
CAMPAKA (Flower) 
Campaka  consists  of  dried  buds  and  flowers,  including  calyx,  of  Michelia 
champaca Linn. (Fam. Magnoliaceae), a tall, ever green tree, usually upto 30 m in height  
and 3.5 m in girth with a straight trunk, found in eastern Himalayas, North-East India and  
Western Ghats; it is planted throughout India in gardens and near temples.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Camp®ya, HamapuÀpa 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Champaka, Champa 
English:Golden Champa 
Gujrati  :Raichampo, Pilo Champo 
Hindi    :Champa 
Kannada:Sampige 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Campakappuv 
Marathi:Sonachanpha 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Champa 
Tamil   :Sampagi 
Telugu  :Chattu Sampangi 
Urdu    :Champa 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug  consists  of  broken  pieces  of  pedicel,  sepal,  petal,  anthers,  gynophore  
(torus), flowers solitary, fragrant, crumbled, blackish-brown in colour; sepal brown,  
linear,  acute;  petal  dark  brown,  oblong;  stamens  numerous;  anther  linear,  adnate,  
introrse; gynophore, 2.5-4 cm long; curved style with beak-shaped simple stigma.
b) Microscopic 
Pedicel -Shows ridges and furrows in outline with a single layered epidermis having a  
few  unicellular  hairs;  cortex  composed  of  a  wide  zone  of  collapsed,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells having a few oil globules; collateral vascular bundle and secretory  
cells are present; pith consisting of thin-walled, oval to polygonal, parenchymatous  
cells; irregular, elongated, lignified stone cells isolated or in groups, having narrow  
lumen and pits, found in cortex and pith. 
Sepal  - Single layered epidermis, slightly sinuous in surface view, present on both  
15surfaces, a few unicellular hairs are in outer surface; ground tissue composed of thin-
walled, oval to polygonal, parenchymatous cells having a few prismatic crystals of  
calcium oxalate; a few vascular bundles present in ground tissue. 
Petal  -Epidermis single layered of rectangular cells, slightly sinuous in surface view,  
present on both surfaces; a few fibro-vascular bundles present in ground tissue along  
with a few cluster crystals of calcium oxalate.
Powder  - Dark-brown; shows fragments of parenchymatous cells, broken unicellular  
hairs, vessels with spiral thickening, a few prismatic and cluster crystals of calcium  
oxalate; a few irregular shaped, elongated, lignified, stone cells with narrow lumen in  
singles or groups; fairly large circular to spherical, brown coloured, numerous smooth  
pollen grains measuring 67-82  µ in dia. having clear exine and intine and a few oil  
globules. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using Toluene: Ethylacetate (9:1)  
shows under UV (366 nm) one fluorescent spot at Rf. 0.92 (blue). On exposure to Iodine  
vapour nine spots appear at Rf. 0.20, 0.25, 0.35, 0.40, 0.51, 0.57, 0.77, 0.88 and 0.92 (all  
yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and on heating the plate for  
ten minutes at 105 °C seven spots appear at Rf. 0.20, 0.25, 0.40, 0.51, 0.57, 0.77 and 0.92  
(light violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Volatile Oil 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :H¤dya, Pittajit, Kaphapittasra N¡¿aka, ViÀagh¸a 
 
16IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - CandanabalalakÀ¡di Taila, Baladh¡try¡di Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Vra¸a, K¤mi, M£trak¤chra, V¡tarakta, Ku¿¶ha, Kandu 
DOSE  - PuÀpa C£r¸a 1-3 gm 
   
  
178. Chicha (Ft. Pl.)  
CIØCË (Fruit Pulp) 
Ciµc¡  consists  of  fruit  pulp  without  seeds  of  Tamarindus  indica  Linn.  (Fam.  
Fabaceae), a moderate sized to large evergreen tree upto 24 m in height and 7 m in girth,  
cultivated throughout India, or self sown in waste places and in forest lands; also planted as  
avenue trees
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Amlika, Tinti·ika 
Assamese:Tamar, Teteli 
Bengali:Tetula, Tentul, Ambli 
English:Tamarind Tree 
Gujrati  :Anvali 
Hindi    :Imli 
Kannada:Hunisemale 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Puli, Amlam 
Marathi:Chinch 
Oriya   :Koina, Omlika 
Punjabi:Imli, Amli 
Tamil   :Puli, Aanvilam 
Telugu  :Chint, Chinta 
Urdu    :Imli 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit pulp occurs as a reddish-brown, moist, sticky mass, in which yellowish-
brown fibres are readily seen; odour, pleasant; taste, sweetish and acidic. 
b) Microscopic 
Fruit pulp consists of thin-walled, elongated to polygonal, parenchymatous cells  
of considerable size, traversed by a number of long fibro-vascular bundles and having a  
very few small starch granules, and numerous prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5 per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     46   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     59   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
18 T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica Gel 'G' using n-Butanol : Acetic acid : Water  
(5:1:4) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two spots at Rf. 0.27 and 0.46 (both yellowish blue).  
On exposure to Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.27, 0.46, 0.57, 0.65 and 0.87 (all  
yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at  
105°C for ten minutes five spots appear at Rf. 0.46, 0.57. 0.65, 0.71 and 0.87 (all grey)
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Inorganic acids, Sugars, Saponin and bitter principle - Tamarindinca
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa, Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Amla 
Karma:Kaphav¡tanu¶, D¢pana, Basti¿uddhikara, Bh®di, ViÀ¶ambhi, D¢pana,  
H¤dya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - áankha Dr¡vaka, áankhava¶i 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - U·araroga, Agnim¡ndya, Ar°caka, Pakti¿£la, T¤Àa, Klama, árama,  
Bhr¡nti, Kar¸a¿£la, N¡·ivra¸a 
DOSE  - 4-10 g of the drug 
   
  
199. Dadima (Fr.Fruit.)  
DËÚIMA (Fresh Fruit) 
D¡·ima consists of fresh fruit of Punica granatum Linn. (Fam. Punicaceae), a large  
deciduous shrub or a small tree; found growing wild in the valley and outer hills of  
Himalayas, between 900 and 1800 m and cultivated in many parts of the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Dantab¢ja, L°hitapuÀpa 
Assamese:Dalim 
Bengali:Dadima, Dalimgach, Dalim 
English:Pomenagrate 
Gujrati  :Dadam, Dadam phala 
Hindi    :Anar, Anar-ke-per 
Kannada:Dalimba, Dalimbe haonu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Mathalam 
Marathi:Dalimba 
Oriya   :Dalimba 
Punjabi:Anar 
Tamil   :Madulam Pazham 
Telugu  :Dadimbakaya, Dadimma 
Urdu    :Anar 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit a balausta, globose, 4 to 8 cm diam; depressed, bluntly 5 to 8 angled and  
tipped with persistent calyx alongwith withered stamens; coriaceous, smooth; yellowish  
brown or red; odour, not distinct; carpel four to five, with papery, thin-walled, fused in 2  
whorls, seeds numerous, compressed with a whitish-pink or bright red, transparent,  
fleshy testa; taste, sour to sweet; seed appears hard, angular, white to buff with an  
astringent taste.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya,  D¢pana,  H¤dya,  Kaphahara,  M®dhya,  Pittahara,  V¡tahara,  
Pacana, Rucya, Mukhagandhahara, áramahara, áukrala, Tarpaka, Varc
°vibandhan¢ya, Gr¡¶hi 
20 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Dadhika Gh¤ta, D¡dim¡À¶aka C£r¸a, Bh¡skaralava¸a C
£r¸a, B¤hacch¡gal¡dya G¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Ar°caka, Atis¡ra, D¡ha, Ëmav¡ta, Jvara, Kasa, Raktapitta, T¤Àna 
DOSE  - 15-30 ml. 
   
  
2110. Dadima (Ft. Rind.)   
DËÚIMA (Fruit Rind) 
D¡·ima consists of dried fruit rind (pericarp) of  Punica granatum  Linn. (Fam. 
Punicaceae), a large deciduous shrub or a small tree, found wild in the warm valleys of the  
outer hills of Himalayas between 900 to 1800 m and also cultivated in many parts of the  
country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:L°hi¶apuÀpa, Dan¶ab¢ja 
Assamese:Dalim 
Bengali:Dadima, Dalim, Dalimgach 
English:Pomenagrate 
Gujrati  :Dadam, Dadam phala 
Hindi    :Anar, Anar-ke-per 
Kannada:Dalimba, Dalimbe haonu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Mathalam 
Marathi:Dalimba 
Oriya   :Dalimba 
Punjabi:Anar 
Tamil   :Madulam Pazham 
Telugu  :Dadimbakaya, Dadimma 
Urdu    :Anar 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in 0.1 to 0.5 cm thick, more or less concave, salver- shaped pieces,  
some pieces showing residual carpel walls and some having persistent toothed calyx  
tube alongwith withered stamens, styles and a few seeds; coriaceous, tough and nearly  
smooth; brown to reddish-brown externally and brownish-yellow internally; bearing  
impressions left by seeds; fracture, short; odour not distinct; taste, astringent. 
b) Microscopic 
Epicarp single layered covered with thick cuticle; mesocarp consists of a wide  
zone  of  oval  to  polygonal  thin  walled  parenchymatous  cells;  a  few  fibro-vascular  
bundles, tanniniferous vessels, secretory canals, oil globules, single and a number of  
groups of round or oval to elongated stone cells, simple and compound starch grains  
having 2 or 3 components with concentric striations and central hilum, and rosette  
crystals of calcium oxalate present in mesocarp. 
22Powder  - Yellowish-brown; shows single or groups of stone cells; oval to polygonal,  
parenchymatous cells in surface view; vessels with scalariform thickening, tanniniferous  
vessels and a few rosette crystals of calcium oxalate and rounded to oval starch grains,  
measuring 3 to 5 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.4  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Ethylacetate :  
Formic acid (5:4:1) shows in visible light one spot at Rf. 0.74 (bluish grey). Under U.V.  
(366 nm) one fluorescent zone is visible at Rf. 0.74 (dark blue). On exposure to Iodine  
vapour two spots appear at 0.74 (dirty yellow) and 0.95 (yellow). On spraying with 10%  
aqueous Ferric chloride reagent one spot appears at Rf. 0.74.(blue). On spraying with 5%  
Mathanolic-Sulphuric Acid and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C two spots 
appear at Rf. 0.74 (brownish grey) and 0.95 (violet)
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannic acid, Sugar and Gum
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Amla, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :Anusna 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Gr¡hi, V¡ta Kaphahara, Vra¸ar°paka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Khadir¡di Gutika, M¤tasaµj¢vani Sura, Kalyanaka Gh
¤ta, Maaric¡di Gutika, Nilikadya Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  D¡ha,  Jvara,  K¡sa,  Prav¡hika,  Raktapitta,  Raktavik¡ra,  
Kantharoga, Mukhadaurgandha, Aruci, Amlapitta, Atis¡ra 
DOSE  - Powder 3-6 g 
   
  
2311. Dadima (Lf.)  
DËÚIMA (Leaf) 
D¡·ima Dadima consists of dried leaf of Punica granatum Linn. (Fam. Punicaceae),  
a small deciduous shrub or small tree, found wild in the warm valleys of the outer hills of  
Himalayas between 900 to 1800 m and also cultivated in many parts of the country.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:L°hitapuÀpa, Dan¶ab¢ja 
Assamese:Dalim 
Bengali:Dadima, Dalim, Dalimgach 
English:Pomenagrate 
Gujrati  :Dadam, Dadam phala 
Hindi    :Anar, Anar-ke-per 
Kannada:Dalimba, Dalimbe haonu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Mathalam 
Marathi:Dalimba 
Oriya   :Dalimba 
Punjabi:Anar 
Tamil   :Madulam Pazham 
Telugu  :Dadimbakaya, Dadimma 
Urdu    :Anar 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaves 2 to 8 cm long, 0.7 to 2.0 cm broad, oblong, lanceolate, acute, entire,  
glabrous, greyish-green to yellowish-green.
b) Microscopic 
Leaf-
Petiole - shows single layered epidermis covered by thin cuticle, epidermis followed by  
2  or  3  layered  collenchymatous  hyodermis;  single,  bicollateral,  crescent-shaped,  
vascular bundle situated in centre; rest of the tissues between vascular bundle and  
hypodermis consists of 3 layers or more, oval to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous  
cells, some having rosette and a few prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. 
Midrib -shows single layered epidermis covered by a thin cuticle, epidermis followed by  
2 or 3 layers of round to angular collenchymatous cells; beneath collenchyma 3 or 4  
24layers of parenchyma present, some containing a few rosette and prismatic crystals of  
calcium oxalate, simple and compound starch grains, consisting of 2 or 3 components,  
round to oval shaped, measuring 5.5 to 8.5 µ in dia.; vascular bundle situated centrally,  
similar to that of petiole.
Lamina  -shows  epidermis on both  surfaces, single layered; palisade single layered;  
spongy parenchyma 3 or 4 layered; idioblast containing very large solitary crystal of  
calcium oxalate; a few small solitary calcium oxalate crystals also present in spongy  
parenchyma; palisade ratio 4 to 6; stomatal index 12 to 25; anomocytic stomata, present  
only on lower surface.
Powder  - Greyish-green; shows spiral vessels, palisade and spongy parenchyma cells,  
rosette  and  prismatic  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  fragments  of  upper  and  lower  
epidermis with beaded straight walled and sinuous walled respectively in surface view,  
simple, round to oval, starch grain measuring 5.5 to 8.5 µ in dia., and co5mpound starch  
grains having 2 or 3 components.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10.5 per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     25   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Benzene:  
Ethylacetate (9: 1) v/v shows in visible light four spots at Rf. 0.06 (light green), 0.48  
(light green), 0.68 (light green) and 0.79 (green). Under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent  
zones visible at Rf. 0.06, 0.14, 0.54 and 0.94 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour  
nine spots appear at Rf. 0.02, 0.09, 0.38, 0.62, 0.66, 0.76, 0.87, 0.91 and 0.97 (all  
yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Phosphomolybdic acid reagent and heating  
the plate at 105°C for ten minutes nine spots appear at Rf. 0.06, 0.10, 0.33, 0.41, 0.54,  
0.62, 0.79, 0.89 and 0.97 (all grey).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannins and β-Sitosterol
  
25PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :KaÀ¡ya, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphahara, Rucya 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  Aruci,  Atis¡ra,  Jvara,  K¡sa,  K¤mi,  Prav¡hika,  Raktapitta,  
Agnim¡ndya, Mukhap¡ka 
DOSE  - Patra Svarasa : 5-10 ml.
   Patra Kalka : 5-10 g. 
   
  
2612. Devadaru (Ht.Wd.)  
DEVADËRU (Heart Wood) 
Devad¡ru consists of dried heart wood of  Cedrus deodara  (Roxb.) Loud. (Fam.  
Pinaceae), a very large and tall ever green tree, upto 75m in height and ranging from 2.4 to  
3.6 m in girth, occasionally even upto 13.5 m in girth, found in North Western Himalayas  
from Kashmir to Garhwal, between 1200 to 3000 m and also cultivated in Kumaon.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Bhadrad¡ru, Surabh£ruha, Amarad¡ru, D®vak¡Àtha, D¡ru, Surad¡ru,  
Amarataru 
Assamese:Shajar Tuljeen 
Bengali:Devdaroo 
English:Deodar, Himalayan Cedar 
Gujrati  :Devdar, Teliyo Devdar 
Hindi    :Devdar, Devdaroo 
Kannada:Deevdar 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Devtaram 
Marathi:Devdar, Telya Dedaroo 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Diyar, Dewdar 
Tamil   :Devdaroo 
Telugu  :Devdari Chettu, Devdaree 
Urdu    :Deodar 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Wood  moderately  hard,  light  yellowish-brown  to  brown;  wood  splits  readily  
longitudinally; annual rings well marked; medullary rays appear as whitish lines; resin  
canals, if present, arranged in long tangential rows, showing up as dark, narrow line on  
the radial surface of the wood pieces; odour, aromatic; taste, not distinct.
 
b) Microscopic 
Mature wood almost entirely of narrow, quadrangular or rarely five or six sided  
tracheids, having very thick-wall with pits and a narrow lumen; xylem rays very fine,  
numerous and run straight throughout the region, uniseriate and 2 to 16 cells high in  
tangential section; vessels absent. 
Powder - Brownish-yellow in colour and oily, shows entire or fragments of tracheids  
and xylem ray cells.
27IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     1.5  per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using Toluene: Ethylacetate (9:1)  
shows under U.V. (366 nm) six fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.11. 0.18. 0.32. 0.46, 0.65 and  
0.75 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.14. 0.42. 0.51,  
0.67, 0.78, 0.84 and 0.92 (all yellow). On spraying with Methanolic-Sulphuric acid  
reagent and on heating the plate for ten minutes at 105 °C eight spots appear at Rf. 0.10  
(violet), 0.18 (violet), 0.52 (grey), 0.64 (violet), 0.71 (violet). 0.78 (violet). 0.89 (violet),  
0.92 (green).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Terpenoids, Flavonoids and Glycosides.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, V¡tahara, DuÀ¶avra¸a áodhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Khadir¡riÀ¶a, DaÀam£l¡riÀ¶a, D®vad¡rvariÀ¶a, M¤tasaµj
¢vanisura, Karpur¡dyarka, Pram®hamihira Taila,  
Candan¡di  C£rna,  Sudar¿ana  C£r¸a,  N¡rayana  
Taila, Pradarantaka Lauha, V¡taraktanaka Lauha,  
Mahavi¿agarbha Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áotha, Jvara, K¤mi, Kandu, P¢nasa, Vibandha, Ëdhm¡na, Tandra,  
Hikka, Pram®ha, Kasa, Ku¿¶ha, Ëmav¡ta, Raktavikara, Sutik¡r°ga 
DOSE  - 3-6 g of the drug in powder form 
   
  
2813. Dhattura (W.P.)  
DHATTÍRA (Whole Plant) 
Dhatt£ra consists of dried whole plant of Datura metel  Linn. Syn. D. fastuosa L.; 
(Fam. Solanaceae), occurring wild throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Kanaka, Unmatta, Dhustura 
Assamese:Dhatura 
Bengali:Dhatura 
English:White Thorn Apple 
Gujrati  :Dhanturo 
Hindi    :-- 
Kannada:Ummatti, Madagunaki, Dathura 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Umman, Ummatt, Ummattu 
Marathi:Dhotra 
Oriya   :Dudura 
Punjabi:Dhatura 
Tamil   :Umattai 
Telugu  :Tella-ummettha 
Urdu    :Dhatura 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Cylindrical with lateral branches, brown coloured, rough due to fissures and root  
scars; fracture, splintery; odour, not characteristic; taste, bitter. 
Stem - Dichotomously branched, cylindrical, blackish-dark to purple colour, internode  
very short; fracture, short; odour, not characteristic; taste, bitter.
Leaf - Petiolate, pubescent; 6 to 11 cm long, 2 to 8 cm broad; ovate, acute, repand and  
dentate, but sometimes entire, base unequal, odour, not characteristic; taste, bitter. 
Flower -  Stalked,  stalk  finely  pubescent,  calyx  upto  10  cm  long,  tubular,  lobes  
acuminate; corolla purple or purple tinged outside, upto 15 cm long, usually double,  
sometime  triple  (3  whorls),  funnel-shaped,  lobes  5  for  each  whorl;  stamen  -5,  
epipetalous with-connivent anthers, anther 10 to 12 mm long; gynoecium-bicarpellary,  
carpels placed obliquely in relation to mother axis, placentation axile, placenta swollen,  
ovule numerous. 
29Fruit - Capsule, ovate to obovate with persistent reflexed calyx; about 4 cm long, 3 cm  
wide, covered with short, stout, spines; taste, bitter and acrid. 
Seed - Light brown, reniform, compressed, flattened, 0.4 to 0.5 cm long, and 0.4 cm  
wide, foveate, surface finely pitted; taste, bitter and acrid (warning -poisonous). 
b) Microscopic 
Root  - Shows 4 to 7 layers of thin-walled, rectangular cork cells; secondary cortex  
composed of 3 to 4 layers, thin-walled, parenchymatous, tangentially elongated cells;  
secondary phloem composed of usual elements, traversed by phloem rays; secondary  
xylem composed of usual elements; vessels two types with spiral thickening or with  
bordered pits; xylem rays 1 to 4 cells wide; sandy microsphenoidal crystal of calcium  
oxalate scattered in the secondary cortex and phloem parenchyma.
Stem - Shows a single layered, epidermis covered by striated, thick cuticle having a few  
unicellular trichomes, followed by 2 or 3 layered, ruptured, rectangular cork cells;  
secondary cortex consisting of 4 to 7 layered, collenchymatous and 2 to 5 layered  
parenchymatous cells; endodermis distinct, containing starch grains; pericycle consists  
of 1 or 2 layers of parenchyma and pericyclic fibres in singles or groups of 2 or 3 or  
more; secondary phloem composed of sieve elements and parenchyma but no fibres;  
secondary xylem composed of vessels, tracheids, fibres and parenchyma; vessels with  
spiral thickening and pits; sandy crystals of calcium oxalate are found scattered in  
secondary  cortex  and  phloem  parenchyma;  starch  grains  oval  to  rounded,  simple,  
measuring 3 to 7 µ in dia., present in secondary cortex and phloem parenchyma. 
Leaf 
Petiole - shows plano-convex outline, cuticularised single layered epidermis, followed  
by cortex composed of 7 or 8 rows of round to polygonal, thick-walled, collenchyma  
cells and 2 or 3 rows of thin-walled, round to polygonal, parenchyma cells; vascular  
bundles bicollateral in a discontinuous ring, number of sandy microsphenoidal, a few  
rosette and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate present in cortex and pith region. 
Midrib - shows similar structure to that of petiole; collenchyma well developed in basal  
region and poorly in middle and upper region; cortex and endodermal cells containing  
simple and compound, oval to round, mostly eccentric starch grains measuring 2 to 4 µ 
in dia. with 2 or 3 components; cortical cells large hexagonal to round, without any  
crystals.
Lamina - shows cuticularised single layered epidermal cells bearing both glandular and  
non-glandular trichomes on both surfaces; non-glandular trichomes uniseriate, mostly  
multicellular; a few unicellular trichomes with warty surface; glandular trichomes short,  
stalked  with  multicellular,  globose  head;  mesophyll  differentiated  into  palisade  
30parenchyma of single layer and spongy parenchyma of 6 to 8 layers, having numerous  
rosette and a few micro sphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate; stomata anisocytic,  
present on both surfaces; stomatal index 16 to 17 on upper surface, 17 to 23 on lower  
surface; palisade ratio 5 to 6; vein islet number 19 to 22 per sq. mm. 
Seed - Shows an outline with bulges at 3 places, single layered epidermis with elongated  
cells; seed coat consists of thick-walled, lignified, sclerenchymatous cells, forming club  
shaped  structure,  followed  by  3  to  5  layered,  more  or  less  tangentially  elongated,  
parenchymatous cells; endosperm composed of polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous  
cells filled with aleurone grains and abundant oil gloubles, embryo more or less curved. 
Powder -  Greyish-brown;  shows  fragments  of  both  glandular  and  non-glandular  
trichomes;  glandular  trichomes  short  stalked  with  multicellular  globose  heads;  non  
glandular trichomes unbranched, long, mostly multicellular, a few unicellular trichomes  
with warty surfaces; anisocytic stomata, vessels with spiral thickening, a few sandy  
micro sphenoidal and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; simple, oval to round starch  
grains measuring 2 to 7 µ in dia., and compound starch grains with 2 or 3 components. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   16   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol  
(80:20) shows under U.V. (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.65 (blue), 0.67  
(pink) and 0.98 (pink). On exposure to Iodine vapour nine spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.15,  
0.37, 0.48, 0.61, 0.67, 0.83, 0.89 and 0.98 (all yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff  
reagent followed by sodium nitrite solution, two spots appear at Rf. 0.11 and 0.98 (both  
orange yellow).
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids (Hyoscine) and two withanolide Glucosides (Dhaturame -
telin A & B) 
 
31PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Var¸ya, Madak¡ri, Agni V¤ddhikara, Jangama ViÀahara 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Kanak¡sava,  Ek¡ngav¢ra  Rasa,  PuÀpadhanva  Rasa,  
Tribhuvana K¢rti Rasa, ári Jayama´gala Rasa, Laghu  
Vi¿agarbha Taila, ViÀatinduka Taila, Dhattura Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - áv¡sa, Jvara, K¤mi, Kandu, Kasa, KuÀ¶ha, Unm¡da, V¤¸a, Mutrak
¤ccha, Tvaka D°Àa, Yika LikÀa, Alarka ViÀa, Karma, N¡di,  
Indralupta, Padad¡ha, Sthanusthita P¢da 
DOSE  - 100 - 200 mg. 
   
  
3214. Durva (W.P.)  
DÍRVA (Whole Plant) 
D£rva  consists of dried whole  plant of  Cynodon  dactylon  (Linn.) Pers. (Fam.  
Poaceae), an elegant, tenacious, perennial, creeping grass growing throughout the country  
and ascending to 2440 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:áataparva, áatavalli, N¢lad£rva 
Assamese:Ushb 
Bengali:Doorva, Neel Doorva 
English:Creeping Cynodon, Dhub Grass 
Gujrati  :Dhro, Khaddhro, Leelodhro, Neeladhro 
Hindi    :Doob, Neelee Doob 
Kannada:Garikai-Hallu, Garike, Garik Hallu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Karuk, Karukappullu 
Marathi:Harlee, Neel durva, Haryali 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Dubea 
Tamil   :Arukampillu 
Telugu  :Doolu, Harvali, Garichgaddi 
Urdu    :Doob Ghas 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root -Fibrous, cylindrical, upto 4 mm thick, minute hair-like roots arise from the main  
roots; cream coloured.
Stem -Slender, prostrate, upto 1.0 mm thick, jointed, leafy, very smooth, yellowish green  
in colour. 
Leaf - 2 to 10 cm long and 1.25 to 3 mm wide, narrowly linear or lanceolate, finely acute  
more or less glaucous, soft, smooth, usually conspicuously distichous in the barren  
shoots and at the base of the stems; sheath light, glabrous or sometimes bearded, ligule a  
very fine ciliate rim.
b) Microscopic 
Root  - Mature root shows epiblema or piliferous layer composed of a single layer of  
thin-walled, radially elongated to cubical cells; hypodermis composed of 1 or 2 layered,  
thin-walled, tangentially elongated to irregular shaped cells; cortex differentiated into  
33two zones,. 1 or 2 layers of smaller, thin-walled, polygonal, lignified sclerenchymatous  
and 4 to 6 layers of larger thin-walled, elongated parenchymatous cells; endodermis  
quite distinct, single layered, thick-walled, tangentially elongated cells; pericycle 1 or 2  
layers composed of thin-walled sclerenchymatous cells; vascular bundles consisting of  
xylem and phloem, arranged in a ring on different radials; xylem exarch, having usual  
elements;  centre occupied by wide pith, composed of  oval to rounded  thick-walled  
parenchymatous cells containing numerous simple, round to oval or angular starch grains  
measuring 4 to 16 µ in dia., and compound starch grains having 2 to 4 components
Stem  -  Oval in  outline  with  a little depression  on one  side, shows  a cuticularised  
epidermis  single  layered,  having  lignified  walls;  hypodermis  1  or  2  layers,  
sclerenchymatous;  cortex  composed  of  3  to  5  layers  of  round  to  oval  thin  walled  
parenchymatous  cells;  endodermis  not  distinct;  pericycle  present  in  the  form  of  
continuous ring of 2 to 5 layers of sclerenchymatous fibres; vascular bundle collateral,  
closed and scattered throughout the ground mass of parenchyma, each surrounded by  
sclerenchymatous sheath; vessels simple, spiral, scalariform, and annular; medullary rays  
not distinct; fibres short, thick walled, having narrow lumen and pointed tips; starch  
grains simple and compound having 2 to 4 components, present in cortex and ground  
tissue, simple grains measuring 4 to 16 µ in dia.
Leaf - Lamina shows nearly square to oval epidermis having irregularly cutinised outer  
wall, bulliform cells present on the dorsal side which are grouped together and lie at the  
bottom of a well defined groove in between the veins; these are thin walled and lack  
chlorophyll, extend deep into the mesophyll; mesophyll not differentiated into palisade  
and spongy parenchyma; row of vascular bundles nearly alike, except that the median  
bundle  is  larger;  bundle  sheath  single,  and  consists  of  thin-walled  more  or  less  
isodiametric parenchyma cells containing chloroplast; mesophyll tissue broken by 1 or 2  
thin-walled  colourless  cells  which  extend  from  bundle  sheath  to  the  thin  walled  
parenchymatous band of stereome near upper and lower epidermis. 
Powder - Yellowish-green; simple pitted, scalariform, annular and spiral, vessels; short  
lignified, thick walled, pointed fibres, paracytic stomata; epidermis in surface view, of  
elongated, rectangular long cells and nearly square small cells having sinuous walls;  
simple and compound starch grains, measuring 4 to 16 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   9    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     9.5  per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
34 T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene:  
Ethylacetate (90 : 10) shows in visible light five spots at Rf. 0.1 (green), 0.40 (yellow),  
0.45 (green), 0.51 (yellow) and 0.57 (green). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots  
appear at Rf. 0.22, 0.40, 0.45, 0.51, 0.57 and 0.64 (all yellow in colour). On spraying  
with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten 
minutes six spots appear at Rf. 0.22, 0.40, 0.45, 0.51 (all grey), 0.57 (green) and 0.64  
(grey).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Phenolic Phytotoxins (Ferulic, Syringic, P-coumaric, Vanillic, P-  
Hydroxybenzoic and O-Hydroxyphenil acetic acid)
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, áramsana, Rucya 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Atis¡ra, Chardi, D¡ha, Jvara, Raktapitta, T¤Àa, Murccha, Visarpa,  
Taktavik¡ra, Tvaka R°ga, Kaphaja Jvara, V¡taja Jvara, N¡sagata  
Taktapitta 
DOSE  - Svarasa 10-20 ml. 
     
3515. Gambhari (St.Bk.)  
GAMBHËRÌ (Stem Bark) 
Gambh¡r¢  consists  of  dried  stem  bark  of  Gmelina  arborea  Linn.  (Fam. 
Verbenaceae),  a  large  deciduous  tree,  mostly  found  in  southern  peninsula  and  upto  
Kashmir
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Ka¿mari, Ka¿marya, ár¢par¸i 
Assamese:Gamari 
Bengali:Gamar 
English:Candhar Tree 
Gujrati  :Shivani hannu, Shewan 
Hindi    :Gambhar Khambhari 
Kannada:Shivani, Shivanigida 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kumizhu, Kumbil, Kumpil, Kumizhin 
Marathi:Shivan 
Oriya   :Gambhari 
Punjabi:Gumhar, Kumhar 
Tamil   :Nilakumizh 
Telugu  :Peggumudu, Peggumaddi 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Mature stem bark 0.2 to 0.7 cm thick, channelled pieces, ribbed, quilled at some  
places; outer surface yellowish-brown in colour and rough due to some longitudinal and  
horizontal cracks, inner surface fairly smooth and reddish-brown to black in colour;  
fracture, short; odour and taste not distinct. 
b) Microscopic 
Shows a wide zone of cork consisting of rectangular, thick-walled, lignified  
cells; cork cambium 1 or 2 layers, filled with reddish-brown contents; secondary cortex  
consists of 2 or 3 layers, tangentially elongated, elliptical, thin-walled, parenchymatous  
cells; secondary phloem composed of sieve elements, parenchyma and phloem rays;  
parenchyma rectangular to polygonal, phloem rays 1 to 7 cells wide, 3 to 16 cells high;  
rays 4 or 5 cells wide and 8 to 10 cells high more common; stone cells oval to elliptical,  
lignified, pitted, with wide lumen; stone cells and lysigenous cavities present throughout  
phloem.
36Powder -  Reddish-brown;  shows  fragments  of  cork  cells,  thick-walled,  elliptical,  
lignified, pitted stone cells with wide lumen.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.3  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     23   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
  
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform  
Methanol (95:5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) no fluorescent spot. On exposure to Iodine  
vapour two spots appear at Rf. 0.20 and 0.60 (both yellow).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids, in traces. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphahara, M®dhya, á°thahara, P¡cana, Bh®dana, Vi¿ahara,  
D¡ha, Prasamana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Candn¡sava 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - á£la, á°tha, Ar¿a, Bhrama, Jvara, Raktapitta, T¤Àa 
DOSE  - 3-5 gm. 
   
  
3716. Ikshu (Rt. Stock.)  
IKâU (Root Stock) 
IkÀu consists of root stock of Saccharum officinarum Linn. (Fam. Poaceae), a plant  
generally cultivated in all hotter parts of the country for extraction of sugar.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Asipatra, Bhurirasa, D¢rghacchada, Gudamula, T¤¸arasa 
Assamese:Kuhiyare 
Bengali:Akh, Ganna 
English:Sugar-cane 
Gujrati  :Sheradi 
Hindi    :Ganna, Ikh 
Kannada:Ikshu, Kabbu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Karimpu 
Marathi:Us 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Ganna 
Tamil   :Karumbu Ver 
Telugu  :Cheraku, Cheruku 
Urdu    :Ganna, Naishkar 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in form of root stock with attached yellowish-brown stem portion,  
having 10 to 15 cm long, numerous grey to blackish-brown fibrous roots; solid, jointed,  
more or  less cylindrical, 2 to 2.5 cm  thick and varying  in length, rough;  fracture,  
splintery; odour and taste, not distinct.
 
b) Microscopic 
Root Stock - Shows single layered epidermis followed by 3 to 4 layers of oval to  
elliptical,  lignified,  thick-walled  more  or  less  radially  elongated,  sclerenchymatous  
cells; cortex consists of upper 12 to 15 layers oval to polygonal, thin-walled and lower 5  
layers, elliptical, parenchymatous cells; endodermis single layered; pericycle 3 or 4  
layers, sclerenchymatous; fibro-vascular bundle, covered with sclerenchymatous sheath,  
scattered throughout the ground mass of parenchymatous cells. 
Root - Shows single layered epidermis of thin-walled, rectangular cells, followed by a  
layer of hypodermis of thin-walled, rectangular cells, outer cortex composed of 2 or 3  
layers of thick-walled, polygonal to circular, sclerenchymatous cells filled with dark  
38brown  or  blackish  pigment,  inner  cortex  composed  of  large  aerenchymatous  cells;  
endodermis composed of barrel-shaped, thin-walled cells, enclosing a layer of pericycle  
consisting of rectangular cells having inner wall thickened, and vascular tissue; xylem  
and phloem  form  an equal number  of  separate bundles.  arranged  in a ring;  centre  
occupied by a large pith, composed of circular to oval, parenchymatous, thin-walled  
cells.
Powder - Blackish in colour; shows sclerenchymatous cells of cortex, xylem vessels and  
fibres, groups of spindle-shaped, elongated, epidermal cells in surface view.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica Gel 'G' using n-Butanol : Acetic acid : Water  
(4:1:5) shows under visible light two spots at Rf. 0.80 and 0.96 (both grey). Under U.V.  
(366 nm) four fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.67 (light blue). 0.80 (dark blue). 0.86  
(light blue) and 0.96 (dark blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour several spots appear out  
of which three spots are conspicuous at Rf. 0.30. 0.80 and 0.96 (all yellow). On spraying  
with 5% Methanolic- Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at  
110°C several spots appear out of which three are conspicuous at Rf. 0.10. 0.86 and 0.96  
(all grey).
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Sara, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya, Pittahara, B¤mhana, V¤¿ya, V¡ta¿¡maka, Kaphakara, M£trala 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  T¤napancam£la  Kv¡tha,  Sukumara  Gh¤ta,  Brahma  
Ras¡yana 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - Raktapitta, Visarpa, M£trak¤ccra, Õjok¿ya, N¡sa Rakta sr¡va,  
Graha¸i, P¡n·u, KÀataja K¡sa 
DOSE  - 15-30 gm in decoction form. 
3917. Kadali (Fl.)  
KADALÌ (Flower) 
Kadal¢ Kadali consists of dried flower of Musa paradisiaca Linn. (Fam. Musaceae),  
a monoecious herb, cultivated widely in the country in most of the states. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Mouca, Varana, Ambus¡ra 
Assamese:Kal, Talha 
Bengali:Kela, Kala, Kanch Kala 
English:Banana 
Gujrati  :Kela 
Hindi    :Kela 
Kannada:Bale gadde, Kadubale, Kattebale, Kadali 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kadali, Ksetrak 
Marathi:Kel, Kela 
Oriya   :Kadali, Kadila 
Punjabi:Kela 
Tamil   :Vazhai, Pazham 
Telugu  :Arati chettu 
Urdu    :Kela (Mouz) 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Flower -Inflorescence spike, drug occurs in cut and crumpled pieces, 2.5 to 4.0 cm long  
sessile, unisexual; calyx and corolla present; calyx 2.5 to 4 cm long crumpled, tubular  
spathaceous, dark brown having ridges and furrows; corolla 1.5 to 2.5 cm long, connate,  
crumpled, boat-shaped creamish-yellow, membranous, toothed at apex; stamens 5 + 1  
rudimentary, 0.8 to 1.2 cm long dark brown; filament erect, strongly filiform; anthers  
linear, bithecous; carpels 3, syncarpous, ovary inferior, trilocular, each with several  
ovules; axile placentation; style 3.0 to 4.5 cm long light brown, filiform; stigma capitate  
or sub globose, 3 or 4 lobed, greyish-brown; taste arid odour not characteristic. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Calyx- Shows thin-walled, single layered, upper and lower epidermis, followed by thin  
walled, parenchymatous mesophyll, embedding vascular bundle, having usual elements  
surrounded by some large, thin-walled, specialised cells containing oleo-resin ducts,  
tannin cells and a few oil globules.
40Corolla -Shows thin-walled, striated single layered epidermis on either surface and oval  
to  polygonal  in  surface  view;  mesophyll  2  or  3  layered  consisting  of  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous  cells;  numerous  prismatic  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate  present  in  
mesophyll.
Androecium  - Filament shows single layered epidermis, followed by ground tissues  
consisting  of  oval  to  polygonal,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells  having  crescent  
shaped vascular bundles and oleo-resin cells; anther lobe shows two layered wall, 4 to 6  
celled  tapetum;  pollen  grains  spherical  measuring  26  to  47  µ in  diam.,  smooth,  
yellowish-brown, having clear, thick-walled, pigmented exine, thin-walled, colourless  
intine.
Gynoecium-Ovary shows single layered, cuticularised epidermis followed by ground  
tissue consisting of oval, polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells embedding a few  
thickened pitted cells; stigma consists of 6 chambers having single layered epidermis. 
Powder - Brown, shows fragments of straight walled, polygonal, thin walled epidermal,  
cells,  simple  pitted  cells,  vessels  with  spiral  thickening,  anisocytic  stomata,  a  few  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, spherical, smooth, yellowish-brown pollen grains,  
having clear exine and intine and measuring 26 to 47 µ in dia., a few oil globules, and  
oleoresin cells; a few simple, oval or irregular starch grains measuring upto 65  µ in 
length and 35 µ  in width. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   15   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     18   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  alcoholic  extract  of  the  drug  on  Silica  gel  'G'  using  Toluene:  
Ethylacetate (9 :1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) six fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.09 (blue),  
0.23 (grey), 0.31 (blue), 0.36 (violet), 0.66 (blue) and 0.97 (violet). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.23, 0.31, 0.33, 0.66 and 0.97 (all yellow). On  
spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten 
minutes four spots appear at Rf. 0.09, 0.23, 0.66 and 0.97 (all blue). 
 
 
41CONSTITUENTS  - Saponins, Tannins, reducing and non-reducing Sugars, Sterols and  
Triterpenes.
 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :D¢pana, M¤du, Gr¡hi  
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya, V¤¿ya, Pittana¿aka, Ruca, Kaphaghna, Sthambhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Heman¡tha Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - K¤mi, Raktapitta, áv¡sa Roga, Pradara 
DOSE  - 10-20 gm. 
   
  
4218. Karchura (Rz.)  
KARCÍRA (Rhizome) 
Karc£ra consists of dried pieces of rhizome of  Curcuma zedoaria  Rose, (Fam. 
Zingiberaceae), a large perennial herb with underground tuberous root-stock, growing  
wildly  in  eastern  Himalayas  and  in  moist  deciduous  forests  of  the  central region  of  
Karnataka; also cultivated throughout the country.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Kaccura, Dravi·a 
Assamese:Katuri 
Bengali:Sali, Ekangi, Sari, Kachura 
English:Zedoary 
Gujrati  :Kachuro, Shatakachuro 
Hindi    :Kacura 
Kannada:Kachora 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kachalam 
Marathi:Kachora 
Oriya   :Kachoramu, Gandha Sunthi, Karchura 
Punjabi:Kachur 
Tamil   :Kichili, Kizhangu, Kitchiliki Zhangu, Padam Kizhangu 
Telugu  :Kachoramu, Kichili Gadda 
Urdu    :Zarambad 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs as whole or longitudinally and tangentially cut pieces; the whole  
drug 2 to 6 cm long, cylindrical; transversely cut pieces 2 to 3.5 cm in dia., surface  
rough due to longitudinal wrinkles and occasional protuberances; nodes and internodes  
distinct, a few pieces bear thin root and root scars at places; colour externally greyish-
buff and internally cream; odour, camphoraceous; taste, slightly bitter.
b) Microscopic 
Shows a thin zone of cork composed of 4 to 7 layers of thin-walled, tangentially  
elongated, rectangular cells, sometimes epidermis intact with cork having uniseriate  
covering trichomes; ground tissue consist of thin-walled, circular, oval or polygonal,  
parenchymatous cells, mostly filled with simple starch grains but some cells also contain  
yellow oleo-resin; stelar region demarked from cortex by somewhat collapsed cells of  
endodermis and consists of rounded and oval to polygonal cells mostly filled with starch  
grains  but  some  having  yellow  masses  of  oleo-resin;  vascular  bundles  closed  and  
43collateral, distributed throughout cortical and stelar region, consisting of a few xylem  
and phloem elements; vascular bundles found in the form of a ring in the cortical region  
and in the stelar region, just below endodermis; most of the vascular bundles in rest of  
the stelar region smaller in size and scattered; number of vessels in each bundle varies  
from 2 to 10, bundle with single vessels being very rare; starch grains round to oval, a  
few with slight projection at one end striations distinct, numerous; hilum cleft, indistinct  
at the narrow end, 20 to 70 µ in length and 15 to 35 µ  in width. 
Powder - Greyish-yellow; aromatic; shows fragments of cork, oleo-resin cells, simple  
circular to oval, abundant starch grains measuring 20 to 70 µ in length and 15 to 35 µ in 
width.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Volatile oil                               Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.10 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene Ethylacetate (93 :  
7) v/v shows under U.V. (366 nm) five fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.25, 0.47, 0.76 (all light  
blue), 0.83 (blue) and 0.97 (light blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots appear  
at Rf. 0.25, 0.34, 0.47, 0.58, 0.67, 0.76, 0.83 and 0.97 (all yellow). On spraying with  
Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C eight 
spots appear at Rf. 0.25 (violet), 0.34 (light violet), 0.47 (violet), 0.58 (violet), 0.67  
(light brown), 0.76 (bluish grey), 0.83 (violet) and 0.97 (light brown).
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential Oil and Resin. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphahara, Rucya, V¡tahara, Mukhavai¿adyakara 
 
44IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Karpur¡dyarka, Karc£r¡di C£r¸a (Karc£r¡di Lepa), S
£tas®kara Rasa 
 THERAPEUTIC USES  - ArÀa, Hikka, Jvara, K¡sa, K¤mi, KuÀ¶ha, V¤¸a, Sv¡sa, Gulma, Pl
¢ha, Galagan·a 
DOSE  - 1-3 gm of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
4519. Kasturilatika (Sd.)  
KASTÍRÌLATIKË  (Seed) 
Kast£r¢latk¡ consists of seed of Hibiscus abelmoschus Linn. Syn. Abelmoschus 
moschatus Medik (Fam. Malvaceae), an evergreen shrub about 1.22 m in height cultivated  
in hotter parts of India. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:-- 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Latakasturi 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Bhindo, Bhinda 
Hindi    :-- 
Kannada:Kasturi Kande, Kadu Kastuar 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kattu Kasthuri, Kasturi Kanda 
Marathi:Kasturbhendi 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Mushak Dana, Lata Kasturi 
Tamil   :Kasturi-vendai 
Telugu  :Kasturi Benda 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds greyish-brown and blackish, not velvety to touch, kidney-shaped, slightly  
compressed with shallow depressions on both sides, marked with minute parallel ridges  
and furrows; hilum small and distinct; odour, musk-like; no taste.
b) Microscopic 
Shows two integuments, outer integument forms ridges and furrows; epidermis  
consists of single layered tangentially elongated cells, followed by 1 to 3 layers of thin-
walled tangentially elongated cells in the region of furrows; 1 to 4 rows of rounded,  
thick-walled cells containing yellowish-brown masses with 1 or 2 of the upper most rows  
thin-walled, tangentially elongated and pointed cells present in the region of ridges;  
inner integument represented by palisade like cells, containing some granular masses  
followed by thin and thick-walled parenchyma; the thick-walled being 4 to 8 layered,  
compactly arranged, tangentially elongated, having reddish-brown contents, followed by  
the thin-walled and colourless cells; 8 to 12 layers of cells large, isodiametric to oval; a  
single layer of tangentially elongated cells present; cotyledons two, consisting of single  
46layered cubical to irregular cells of epidermis covered by cuticle and followed by a  
single layered palisade like cells; the rest of the cotyledons consists of 4 to 6 rows of  
thin-walled, isodiametric cells filled with granular masses; lower epidermis composed of  
a single layer of cells covered with cuticle.
Powder -  Greyish-brown;  shows  brown  coloured  parenchyma  cells,  rounded,  thick  
walled cells, a few palisade cells and polygonal and straight walls epidermal cells in  
surface view
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.3  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Fixed Oil                                  Not less than     10  per cent, Appendix     2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethy lacetate 
(9: 1) under UV (366 nm) shows two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.36 and 0.93 (both blue).  
On exposure to Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.19, 0.31, 0.53, 0.71 and 0.93 (all  
yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate  
for about ten minutes at 110 °C five spots appear at Rf. 0.19, 0.31, 0.53, 0.71 and 0.93  
(all grey). On spraying with 5% Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for  
ten minutes at 110 °C five spots appear at Rf. 0.19, 0.31, 0.53, 0.71 and 0.93 (all grey). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil and Volatile Oils
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :CakÀusya, Kaphahara, V¤Àya, Cedini, MukhadaurgandhyanaÀaka, Vasti  
ViÀ°dhani 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Karpur¡dyarka 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - T¤¿na, Mukha R°ga, Vasti R°ga 
DOSE  - 2-4 gm of the drug in powder form. 
4720. Kataka (Sd.)  
KATAKA (Seed)  
Kataka consists of dried seed of Strychnos potatorum Linn. f.(Fam. Loganiaceae), a  
tall tree occurring plentifully in deciduous forests in most of the parts of the country upto  
400m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Nirmali, Payah Prasadisa 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Nirmali 
English:Clearing nut 
Gujrati  :Nirmali 
Hindi    :Chillikavi 
Kannada:Katakam, Tetramabaral 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Katakam 
Marathi:Nirmal 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Nirmali 
Tamil   :Kottai 
Telugu  :Chilla 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seed upto 8 mm dia., circular, bluntly lenticular, shiny with short, appressed  
silky hairs; cream-white in colour with a slightly prominent ridge round the border, no  
bitterness, (Seeds of Strychnos nux-vomica bitter). 
b) Microscopic 
Shows  testa,  consistmg  of  2  or  3  layers,  thick-walled,  elongated,  lignified  
sclerenchymatous  cells  covered  with  numerous,  cylindrical,  unicellular,  lignified,  
trichomes having basal portion ramified; outer endosperm composed of 3 to 8 layers of  
thick-walled,  elongated  palisade-like  cells  arranged  in  rows,  an  inner  endosperm  
composed of thin-walled, oval to polygonal, parenchymatous cells having numerous  
small aleurone grains and oil globules. 
(In seed of  Strychnos nux-vomica base of trichome is pitted, bulbous, ramified  
with a projection normally elongated and thick-walled).
48Powder -  Creamish-yellow and oily; shows fragments of testa, trichomes, endosperm  
cells and oil globules. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     1    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G"  plate  using  Toluene:  
Ethylacetate : Diethylamine (70:20: 1 0). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent with  
tartaric acid two spots appear at Rf. 0.38 (orange and corresponding to that of Brucine)  
and at Rf. 0.55 (faint orange and corresponding to that of Strychnine). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :á¢ta, Guru 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :CakÀusya,  V¡tahara,  áleÀmahara,  Vicagh¸a,  Pittala,  A¿u  D
¤À¶iprasadak¤t (Ka¿yapa), Jala Prasadakara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - DaÀam£l¡riÀ¶a, Nirury¡di Gu¶ika 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - Aruci, K¤mi, Pram®ha, Mutrak¤cchra, Mutr¡¿mari, T¤s¸a, áula.  
N®trar°ga,  áarkara  M®ha,  Rakta  Abhi¿yanda,  V¤scika  ViÀa,  
Apasm¡ra 
DOSE  - 3-6 gm. 
   
  
4921. Kharjura (Drd. Ft.)  
KHARJURA (Dried Fruit) 
Kharjura consists of dried fruit, with seeds removed, of Phoenix dactylifera Linn. 
(Fam. Araceae ), a tall tree upto 36 m high, cultivated or occasionally self-sown in arid  
parts of the country.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Pin·a Kharjura 
Assamese:Tamar 
Bengali:Sohara 
English:Dried Dates 
Gujrati  :Kharek, Kharika 
Hindi    :Chuhara, Chohara 
Kannada:Karinchula, Khajura 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Intappazham, Inthappana 
Marathi:Kharika, Kharik Phala, Khajur, Kharik 
Oriya   :Kharjjuri, Khajur 
Punjabi:Khajur 
Tamil   :Pericham, Karchuram, Perichehantay 
Telugu  :Kharjura, Kharjuramu 
Urdu    :Khurma (Khajoor)  
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit an oblong berry, 2.5 to 7.5 cm long, wrinkled, hard, reddish-brown, and  
sweet
b) Microscopic 
Shows a wide pericarp consisting of a single layered epidermis covered with  
striated cuticle; below epidermis 3 to 5 layers of tangentially elongated, tabular, thin  
walled cells followed by a layer of stone cells with narrow lumen, thick walled, 28 to 55  
µ in dia., with clear striations; below this a wide zone of oval to elongated, thin-walled  
parenchymatous cells present; cells of outer 10 layers more elongated than the inner  
ones; some vascular bundles, groups of tanniniferous idioblasts and oil globules present  
scattered in this region.
Powder  - Reddish-brown; shows  groups of thin-walled parenchyma; stone cells, oil  
globules and tanniniferous idioblasts. 
50IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     74   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using n-Butanol : Acetic acid : Water  
(5:1:4) shows in visible light one spot at Rf. 0.12 (grey). On exposure to Iodine vapour  
two spots appear at Rf. 0.12 and 0.25 (both yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-
Sulphuric acid reagent four spots appear at Rf. 0.12, 0.25 (both black), 0.33 and 0.62  
(both grey).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sugars, Tannins and Vitamins. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya,  H¤dya,  Kaphahara,  Pittahara,  V¡tahara,  V¤¿ya,  Tarpa¸a,  B
¤mha¸a, áukrala 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - Dr¡kÀ¡di Cur¸a, Ól¡dya M°·aka, El¡di Gu¶ika, áiva  
Gu¶ika (Laghu) 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - árama, D¡ha, Gulma, Hikka, Jvara, K¡sa, Murccha, Pram®ha,  
Raktapitta,  Sv¡¿a,  KÀaya,  Ksata  KÀaya,  T¤¿¸a,  Mad¡tyaya,  
Abhigh¡ta, Mukha, Pitta¿£la, Vairasya 
DOSE  - 10-15 gm.  
   
  
5122. Kharjura (Fr. Ft)  
KHARJURA (Fresh Fruit) 
Kharj£ra  consists  of  ripe  and  mature  fruit  with  seed  removed,  of  Phoenix 
dactylifera  Linn.  (Fam.  Araceae),  a  tall  palm  tree  upto  36  m  high,  cultivated  or  
occasionally self-sown in arid parts of the country
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Aharj£ra, Pi¸·a Kharjr£ra 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Khejur 
English:Date 
Gujrati  :Khajur 
Hindi    :Khajur, Pinda, Khajur 
Kannada:Kharjura, Pinda Kharajura 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Prantha Puzam 
Marathi:Khajur 
Oriya   :Khejuri 
Punjabi:Pinda Khajur 
Tamil   :Pericham Pazham 
Telugu  :Khajur pupandu 
Urdu    :Khurma (Khajoor)  
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit a berry, oval to oblong, compressed, of varying shapes; 2 to 3 cm long,  
smooth or slightly wrinkled, reddish-brown to yellowish-brown; pulp fleshy, sticky,  
soft, viscous; odour, not distinct; taste, sweet. 
b) Microscopic 
Fruit shows single layered epidermis with striated cuticle, containing heavily  
cutinized  cells  and  having  stomata;  below  epidermis,  4  or  5  layered  tangentially  
elongated, thin-walled, parenchymatous hypodermis present, followed by a row of stone  
cells with narrow lumen, thick-walled, 28 to 55 µ in dia., with clear striations; mesocarp  
differentiated into two zones, outer consisting of thin-walled parenchyma cells with  
scattered  tannin,  and  oil  globules,  inner  consisting  of  collapsed,  crushed  and  
disorganized cells appearing as loose, shining, 'fibrous' mass, representing the so called  
"rag." scattered sclerosed cells also occur in this region; endocarp composed of single  
layered inner epidermis together with underlying compact tissues. 
52IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     65   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica Gel 'G' using n-Butanol : Acetic acid : Water  
(5:1:4) shows in visible light one spot at Rf. 0.12 (grey). On exposure to Iodine vapour  
two spots appear at Rf. 0.12 and 0.25 (both yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-
Sulphuric acid reagent four spots appear at Rf. 0.12, 0.25 (both black), 0.33 and 0.62  
(both grey).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sugars, Protein and Vitamins
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya,  H¤dya,  Kaphahara,  Pittahara,  Tarpaka,  V¡tahara,  
Mamsavardhaka,  áukrakara,  Rucikara,  K°À¶hagata  V¡yun¡¿aka,  
V¡maka, KÀudha áramahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Dr¡kÀ¡di C£r¸a, Ól¡dya Modaka, Ól¡di Gu¶ika, áiva  
Gu¶ika (Lagu) 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Abhigh¡ta, D¡ha, K¡sa, Mad¡tyaya, Raktapitta, Sv¡¿a, T¤Àa, KÀata  
KÀaya, Jvar¡t¢sara, M£rccha 
DOSE  - 10-50 gm. 
   
  
5323. Krishna Sariva (Rt.)  
KÎâÛASËRIVË (Root) 
K¤Ànas¡riva consists of dried roots of  Cryptolepis buchanani  Roem. & Schult. 
(Fam.  Asclepiadaceae),  a  perennial,  much  branched  climber  with  milky  juice,  found  
throughout the country from Western Kashmir to Assam, ascending to 1200 m in the  
Himalayas and in south upto Kerala.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Jambu Patra, áy¡ma, K¤À¸avalli, K¤À¸am£li 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Shyamalata, Krishna Saarivaa 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Kaleesar, Kalee Anantmool 
Kannada:Karccumbu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kalipalvalli 
Marathi:Mothi Kawalee, Kallee Kawalee 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :-- 
Telugu  :Naltig, Adavipalatige, Rokallipala 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Roots vary in length and are 1 to 1.5 cm thick; slender, cylindrical, dark brown or  
blackish;  rough  due  to  fine  longitudinal  ridges  and  wrinkles  running  sinuously  
lengthwise;  thicker  roots  show  a  few  transverse  cracks,  fissures  and  longitudinal  
wrinkles with remnants of rootlets and a few lenticels; cork easily peelable; fracture,  
short and fibrous; odour, slightly aromatic; taste, sweet and astringent. 
b) Microscopic 
Shows  thin  cork  consisting  of  4  to  14  layers  of  thin-walled,  rectangular  to  
tangentially elongated cells, arranged radially; cork cambium single layered, followed by  
a wide zone of secondary cortex composed of polyhedral, oval to tangentially elongated  
cells having fibres in single or in groups of two to ten; fibres long, thick-walled but very  
occasionally appear also as elongated stone cells; secondary phloem wide consisting of  
sieve elements, phloem parenchyma, fibres and a few crysta1 fibres, and traversed by  
phloem rays; phloem fibres occur in small groups or rarely in singles, somewhat similar  
54in shape to those of secondary cortex with comparatively thicker walls; crystal fibres  
elongated, thick-walled and divided into chambers, usually 7 to 17 in number, each  
chamber  containing  a  prismatic  crysta1  of  calcium  oxalate;  medullary  rays  urn-to  
triseriate; cambium 2 to 4 layered; secondary xylem composed of vessels, tracheids,  
fibre-tracheids,  fibres  and  parenchyma  and  traversed  by  xylem  rays;  vessels  with  
bordered pits, and filled with tyloses; tracheids long and narrow having bordered pits,  
and moderately thick-walls; xylem parenchyma usually rectangular in shape with pitted  
walls but some of the pits become T or Y shaped with reticulate thickening; xylem  
elements  thick-walled  and  lignified;  simple  and  compound  starch  grains  found  in  
abundance in all parenchymatous cells simple being elliptical to oval, measuring 3 to 19  
µ in dia., with central hilum and compound with 2 or 3 components. 
Powder -  Light  grey;  shows  fragments  of  cork cells, vessels  having  bordered  pits,  
tracheids, fibres, prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, starch grains numerous, simple  
and compound, elliptical to oval, measuring 3 to 19  µ in dia., with central hilum and  
compound with 2 or 3 components. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol (90  
: 10) shows under U.V. (366 nm) ten fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.05, 0.10, 0.22, 0.30 (all  
blue), 0.39 (yellow), 0.49, 0.60, 0.72, 0.80 (all blue) and 0.88 (violet). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour nine spots appear at Rf. 0.09, 0.17, 0.26, 0.35, 0.43, 0.61, 0.74, 0.88 and  
0.96 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate  
for about ten minutes at 110 °C eight spots appear at Rf. 0.09, 0.17 (both gery), 0.26  
(blue), 0.35, 0.43, 0.49, 0.61 and 0.96 (all violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids.
 
55PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Trid°Àahara,  T¤À¸ahara,  Ama  ViÀaghna,  áukrakara,  ViÀaghna,  
Kaphana¿aka, Sangr¡hi, Rakta Vikara NaÀaka, Rucya 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Candan¡di  Taila,  áat¡vari  Gu·a,  Kalyanaka  G¤a,  
Triphala  Gh¤ta,  B¤hata  Phala  Gh¤ta,  Maha  
Kalyanaka  Gh¤ta,  Maha  Tiktaka  Gh¤ta,  Maha  
Pancagavya  Gh¤ta,  Vastyamayantaka  Gh¤ta,  B
¤hatcch¡galy¡di Gh¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  Agnim¡ndya,  Aruci,  Atis¡ra,  Jvara,  KÀaya,  KuÀ¶ha,  Pradara,  
Pram®ha, Raktapitta, Sv¡¿a, K¡¿a, Mukha Daurgandhya, Ka¸du,  
V¡ta Rakta, D®hadurgandha 
DOSE  - 5-10 gm. 
   
  
5624. Kunduru (Exud.)  
KUNDURU (Exudate) 
Kunduru consists of exudate of  Boswellia serrata  Roxb. (Fam. Burseraceae), a  
moderate sized, deciduous tree, upto 18 m in height and upto 2.4 m in girth, commonly  
found in the dry forests from Punjab to West Bengal and in peninsular India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:áallaki 
Assamese:Sallaki 
Bengali:Luban, Salai, Salgai 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Shaledum, Saleda, Saladi, Gugal, Saledhi 
Hindi    :Salai, Labana 
Kannada:Madimar, Chilakdupa, Tallaki, Maddi 
Kashmiri:Kunturukkam, Samprani 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Salai cha dink 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Salai Gonda 
Tamil   :Parangi Sambrani 
Telugu  :Parangi sambrani, Anduga, Kondagugi tamu 
Urdu    :Kundur 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in stalactitic, transparent, tears forming agglomerates of various  
shapes and sizes, brownish-yellow, upto 5 cm long, 2 cm thick, fragrant, fracture brittle;  
fractured  surface  waxy  and  translucent;  burns  readily  and  emanates  an  agreeable  
characteristic, balsamic resinous odour; taste, aromatic and agreeable. 
b) Microscopic 
Debris of fibres, rectangular cork cells, very few yellowish oil globules and  
numerous, small or large, oval to round or rhomboidal crystalline fragments present. 
Identification - Trituration with water forms an emulsion; when immersed in alcohol  
(90%) a tear of' Kunduru is not altered much in form but becomes almost opaque and  
white; when a drop of con. H 2S04 is added on a freshly fractured surface, it becomes  
cherry red which, when washed with water changes to a white emulsion, then turn to a  
buff colour. 
57Fluorescence Test - Brownish-yellow colour in day light; aqueous extract under U.V.  
light (366 nm) light green and in (254 nm) shows dark blue colour; alcoholic extract  
under U.V. light (366 nm) is colourless and in (254 nm) shows light green colour.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     45   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     28   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica Gel 'G' using Toluene : Ethylacetate (9: 1)  
shows under U.V. (366nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.23 (light blue), 0.79 (light  
blue), 0.91 (blue) and 0.96 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour nine spots appear at Rf.  
0.08, 0.23, 0.29, 0.41, 0.47, 0.55, 0.82, 0.91 and 0.96 (all yellow). On spraying with  
Vanillin Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C tailing 
with four conspicuous spots appear at Rf. 0.23, 0.55, 0.79 and 0.91 (all violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Oleo-gum-resins.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya,  Kaphahara,  V¡tahara,  Kaphapittahara,  Rakta  Stambhahar,  
Sv®dahara 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Karpuradyarka,  Jirak¡di  Modaka,  Bala  Tila,  Bala  
Guducy¡di T¡ila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Jvara, Pradara, Sv¡¿a, Pittabhi¿yanda, Sarkaram®ha, V¤¿ana á£la,  
Mukharoga, Uka 
DOSE  - 1-3 gm. 
   
  
5825. Kumkuma (Sty & Stg.)  
KUNKUMA (Style and Stigma)  
Kunkuma consists of dried style and stigma from the flowers of  Crocus sativus 
Linn. (Fam. Iridaceae), a small bulbous perennial, 15 to 25 cm high and cultivated by  
corms in the Kashmir valley, specially in the Pampor plateau, at about 1600 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:K®¿ara, Ghu¿i¸a, K¡¿m¢ra, Rakta 
Assamese:Kumkum 
Bengali:Jafran 
English:Saffron 
Gujrati  :Keshar, Kesar 
Hindi    :Keshar, Keshara 
Kannada:Kunkuma, Kesari 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kunkuma Puvu 
Marathi:Keshar 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Kesar, Keshar 
Tamil   :Kungumapuvu 
Telugu  :Kunkuma Puvvu 
Urdu    :Zafran 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Yellowish style, broken or intact along with trifid stigma; stigma is dark red or  
reddish-brown,  cornucopia  shaped,  with  fimbriate  margin,  and  about  25  mm  long;  
broken style are very thin, upto about 10 mm ong; odour, strongly aromatic; taste,  
slightly bitter. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Stigma composed mostly of elongated, thin-walled, parenchyma cells containing  
colouring matter; at the upper end numerous cylindrical papillae or trichomes up to 150  
microns long present; pollen grains, a few, spherical, nearly smooth, from 40 to 120  
microns in dia; occasionally germinated and exhibiting pollen tubes.
Powder - Pale reddish-brown; aromatic, shows elongated, thin-walled, parenchymatous  
cells, unicellular trichomes, a few spherical, smooth, pollen grains measuring 40 to 120  
µ in dia. and xylem vessels with annular and spiral thickenings. 
59IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
Identification 
i.  When sprinked on sulphuric acid, the stigmas turn blue immediately, gradually  
changing to purple and finally purplish red. 
ii.  Stamens of safflower and florets of marigold should be absent; should be free from  
artificially dyed corn silk or fibres. 
Organic dyes: 
i.   Digest about 0.1 g in 10 ml of water for 15 minutes with frequent shaking, filter and  
add 1 g of decolorising charcoal to the filtrate; shake and allow to stand for 10 minutes;  
filter; the fitrate is colourless.
ii.  Macerate 10 mg in 5 ml of alcohol (95 per cent) or methanol; a distinct greenish  
yellow colour is imparted to the liquid; with corresponding quantities of Kunkuma in  
ether or chloroform the solvents remain almost colourless; so also with xylene, benzene  
or carbon tetrachloride.
Absence of Fixed oil or glycerin:  Press between clear filter paper, the paper does not  
display translucent oily spots. 
Foreign organic matter -  Not more than 2 per cent. Styles not more than 10 per cent. 
Loss on drying: Loses not more than 14 per cent of its weight, when dried at 100 °C. 
Ash: Not more than 7.5 per cent. 
Acid-insoluble ash:  Not more than 1 per cent. 
Assay: Weigh  accurately  0.1  g  in  moderately  fine  powder  and  macerate  at  room  
temperature in 100 ml of water for 3 hours with frequent shaking. Filter immediately,  
adding sufficient water through the filter to make 100 ml. Dilute 10 ml of this filtrate,  
accurately measured, to 100 ml with water. Immediately compare the colour of this  
solution  in  Nessler  tubes  or  in  a colorimeter,  with  the  colour  of  N/100  potassium  
dichromate. The colour  of  the  solution  approximates that  of  the N /100  potassium 
dichromate, and the strength of the colour is not less that of an equal depth in mm of the  
N /100 potassium dichromate. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential Oils, Bitter Glycoside, Picrocrocin and Crocin
 
60PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :V¡tahara, Var¸ya, Vi¿aghna, Sl®Àmahara, Rasayana, Jantuhara  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - Karpuradyarka, B¡larka Rasa, Yakuti,  Kunkumadya  
Taila, Mahan¡r¡ya¸a Taila, Pu¿yanuga C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Chardi, K¡sa, Vra¸a, Vyanga, áiroroga, D¤Àti R°ga, Kantha R°ga,  
Sidhma,  Mutra¿°tha,  Ud¡vartta,  Mutragh¡ta,  Suryavartta,  
Ardhava Bhedaka. 
DOSE  - 25-50 mg. 
   
  
6126. Kushmanda (Ft.)  
KÍSMËNÚA (Fruit) 
K£¿m¡n·a consists of the dried piece of fruits of Benincasa hispida (Thunb.) Cogn. 
(Fam. Cucurbitaceae), an extensive trailing or climbing herb cultivated throughout the  
plains of India and on the hills upto 1200 m altitude, as a vegetable. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Pu¿paphalam, B¤ihatphalam 
Assamese:Kumra 
Bengali:Chal Kumra 
English:White guard melon 
Gujrati  :Safed Kohalu, Bhuru, Kohalu, Bhuru Kolu 
Hindi    :Kushmand, Petha 
Kannada:Boodi Humbala 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kumbalanga 
Marathi:Kohala 
Oriya   :Kakharu, Panikakharu 
Punjabi:Petha 
Tamil   :Pooshanikkai 
Telugu  :Boodida Gummadi 
Urdu    :Petha 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in deformed, compressed, cut pieces of various sizes; epicarp cream  
coloured with light yellowish to brownish mesocarp; taste, slightly acidic. 
b) Microscopic 
Mature fruit shows cuticularised epicarp consisting of single layered, squarish or  
slightly tangentially elongated cells of epidermis, outer tangential walls of epidermis  
thickened and cuticularised; a few epidermal cells divide periclinally and become 2 or 3  
layered; mesocarp has a heterogenous structure consisting of multilayered hypodermis  
composed of tangentially elongated, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; immediately  
within this is a zone of thick-walled, multilayered, lignified sclereids with the outer one  
to three layers thicker than the inner 2 to 6 or more layers; beneath this zone, thin-
walled  tangentially  elongated,  parenchymatous  cells  present,  their  size  gradually  
increasing from those at periphery to those inside of mesocarp, the latter becoming  
circular having conspicuous intercellular spaces; vascular bundles poorly developed,  
bicollateral, found scattered throughout mesocarp. 
62Powder - Dirty brown; shows numerous fragments of thin-walled, tangentially elongated  
and circular parenchymatous cells, numerous sclereids in groups and singles and a few  
fragments of xylem vessels having spiral thickenings. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   12   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     24   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Benzene: Ethylacetate  
(9:1) shows under U.V. (366nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.71 and 0.79 (both violet).  
On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.18, 0.28, 0.40, 0.50, 0.59,  
0.71 and 0.79 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating  
the plate at 105°C for ten minute six spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.18, 0.40, 0.50, 071 and  
0.79 (all violet).
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Fatty Oil
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Amla 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya, D¢pana, H¤dya, V¤¿ya, Basti¿°dhaka, M®hana, TridoÀahara, J
¢r¸¡nga  PuÀti  Prada,  Basti¿°dhaka,  áramsana,  Ar°cakahara,  
V¡tapittajit 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Vastyamayantaka  Gh¤ta,  Ku¿m¡ndaka  Ras¡yana,  
Dh¡try¡di Gh¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  Mutragh¡ta,  Mutrak¤cchra,  Pram®ha,  T¤¿¸a,  A¿mari,  M¡nasa  
Vikara, Malabandha 
DOSE  - 5-10 gm. 
   
  
6327. Madayanti (Lf.)  
MADAYANTÌ (Leaf) 
Madayant¢ consists of dried leaves of Lawsonia inermis Linn. (Fam. Lythraceae); a  
small, elegant bush with fragrant flowers, cultivated and naturalised all over the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Nil Madayantika 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Mehadi 
English:Henna 
Gujrati  :Mendi 
Hindi    :Mehandi 
Kannada:Goranta, Korate, Madarangi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Mailanelu 
Marathi:Mendi 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Mehndi 
Tamil   :Marudum 
Telugu  :Gorinta 
Urdu    :Mehendi, Hina 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaves simple, 2 to 3 cm in length, 1 to 1.5 cm in width, greenish-brown to dull  
green; entire, lanceolate; apex mucronate, base tapering, petiole short and glabrous;  
odour, aromatic when crushed; taste, sweet, mucilaginous and slightly astringent. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Petiole  -shows concavo-convex outline; epidermis consisting of single layered cells  
covered by thick, striated cuticle; below epidermis 2 to 4 layered collenchyma and 3 to  
4  layered  parenchyma  having  intercellular  spaces;  pericycle  2  to  4  layered,  stele  
bicollatera1;  cambium  a  thin  strip  present  between  xylem  and  phloem;  phloem  
consisting of usual elements; xylem mostly composed of tracheids and vessels. 
Midrib  -shows  upper  and  lower  epidermis  covered  externally  by  thick  and  striated  
cuticle; epidermis followed by 2 to 4 layers of collenchymatous cells, circular in shape  
with angular  thickening;  beneath which are 3 or  4 layers of  parenchymatous cells,  
isodiametric  with  intercellular  spaces;  stele  crescent-shaped,  consisting  of  usual  
elements traversed by medullary rays; phloem fibres seen in the phloem region; a few  
64parenchymatous cells contain rosette and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate. 
Lamina  - shows upper and lower epidermis composed of tangentially elongated cells  
covered externally by a thick striated cuticle; some large epidermal cells form mucilage  
sacs projecting into adjacent palisade zone; anomocytic stomata distributed on both  
surfaces; mesophyll composed of 1 to 3 layers of palisade tissue and 2 to 4 layers of  
spongy parenchyma; palisade cells filled with chloroplasts, spongy parenchyma oval to  
circular in shape, oil globules present in palisade and spongy parenchyma; rosette and  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate also present in spongy parenchyma; mesophyll  
traversed by vascular strands composed of xylem surrounded by phloem with a patch of  
sclerenchymatous fibres on abaxial side; average stomatal index 10 to 15 and 15 to 18 in  
upper and lower surface the respectively; palisade ratio 5 to 8 on both surfaces; vein islet  
number 30 to 45. 
Powder - Dark brown; shows fragments of thin-walled, parenchyma cells, wavy thin -
walled  epidermal  cells  in  surface  view,  anomocytic  stomata,  rosette  and  prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate, a few oil globules, and vessels showing spiral thickenings. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     18   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     25   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene :  
Ethylacetate (9:1) shows in the visible light three spots at Rf. 0.35, 0.60 and 0.63 (all  
grey). Under U.V. (366 nm) seven spots appear at Rf. 0.18, 0.26, 0.35, (all violet), 0.39,  
0.61,  0.68  (all  reddish  violet)  and  0.73  (violet).  On  spraying  with  5%  Methanolic  
Sulphuric acid regent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes five grey colour  
spots appear at Rf. 0.09, 0.41, 0.61, 0.70 and 0.95. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycosides, colouring matter (Lawsone), Hennotannic acid, Essential  
Oil containing β-Ionone. 
65PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kapha¿¡maka, Pitta¿¡maka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Madayany¡di C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  Bhrama,  Jvara,  Kandu,  KuÀ¶ha,  Raktapitta,  K¡mala,  
Raktapittahara, M£trak¤cchra, Vra¸a. 
DOSE  - 5-10ml (Svarasa) 
   
  
6628. Mahanimba (St.Bk.)  
MAHËNIMBA (Stem Bark) 
Mah¡nimba  consists  of  dried  stem  bark  of  Melia  azedarachta  Linn.  (Fam. 
Meliaceae), a moderate sized deciduous tree, 9 to 12 m high with a cylindrical bole,  
naturalized throughout the country and occurring wild in the sub-Himalayan tracts upto  
1800 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Ramyaka, Dr®ka 
Assamese:Khammaga 
Bengali:Ghoranim 
English:Persian Lilac 
Gujrati  :Bakan Limado, Bakai Nimbu 
Hindi    :Bakain, Drek 
Kannada:Kadu bevu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Malaveppu 
Marathi:Bakana Nimb 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Dharek, Bakain, Drek 
Tamil   :Malaivembu 
Telugu  :Turakavepa 
Urdu    :Neem 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark comparatively thin, about 0.2 to 0.6 cm thick; outer surface black and rough  
being slightly fissured and exfoliating in small slightly woody pieces light and dark-grey  
to greyish-black in colour; inner bark made up of creamy layer alternating with whitish  
ones; fracture, fibrous; taste, extremely bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Mature bark shows outer zone of rhytidoma, formed of alternating strips of dark  
brown cork cells and dead secondary phloem; cork cells compressed, almost rectangular  
and many layered; secondary phloem multilayered and compressed; cork cambium and  
secondary cortex almost absent; beneath rhytidoma a wide zone of secondary phloem  
present, with sieve tubes with compound sieve plates, and with groups of fibres; phloem  
parenchyma oval to irregular, thin-walled, colourless with intercellular spaces; phloem  
rays 2 to 5 cells wide; rosette and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate present in  
phloem parenchyma and ray cells; a few very small, simple, round to oval, starch grains  
67measuring 5 to 11 µ  in dia., having 2 or 3 components. 
Powder - Greyish-yellow; shows fragment of cork cells, phloem fibres, rosette and  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and small, simple round to oval, starch grains  
measuring 5 to 11 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol (9:  
1) under U.V. (366 nm) shows eight fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.10, 0.26, 0.34, 0.50, 0.68,  
0.76, 0.86 (all blue) and 0.95 (bluish green). On exposure to Iodine vapour nine spots  
appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.18, 0.26, 0.34, 0.50, 0.64, 0.76, 0.86 and 0.95 (all yellow). On  
spraying with Dragendorff reagent followed by 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent  
two spots appear at Rf. 0.26 and 0.95 (both orange). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Tannins and Alkaloids. 
 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Grahi,  Kaphajita,  Pittajita,  Rakta  Vik¡rajita,  D¡han¡¿aka,  
Pittakaphahara, Raktad¡hahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - B¤hanmanjiÀ¡di Kvatha C£rna, Maha ViÀagarbha Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - ArÀa, Bhrama, Chardi, Gulma, KuÀ¶ha, Pram®ha, Sv¡¿a, H¤ll¡sa,  
Mu¿ika Vi¿a, Vi¿uci, ViÀamajvara. 
DOSE  - 5-10 gm. 
   
6829. Mandukaparni (W.P.)  
MANDÍKAPARÛI (Whole Plant) 
Mand£kapar¸¢  consists of dried whole plant of  Centella asiatica  (Linn.) Urban. 
Syn.  Hydrocotyle  asiatica  Linn.  (Fam.  Apiaceae),  a  prostrate,  faintly  aromatic,  
stoloniferous perennial herb, commonly found as a weed in crop fields and other waste  
places throughout India upto an altitude of 600 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Manduki, Darduracchada 
Assamese:Manimuni 
Bengali:Jholkhuri, Thalkuri, Thankuni 
English:Indian Pennywort 
Gujrati  :Khodabrahmi, Khadbhrammi 
Hindi    :Brahma Manduki, Brahmi 
Kannada:Ondelaga, Brahmi soppu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kodangal 
Marathi:Karivana 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Brahmi 
Tamil   :Vallarai 
Telugu  :Saraswati Aku, Vauari 
Urdu    :Brahmi 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Small creeping herb with slender stem, rooting at nodes giving rise to thin,  
brownish-grey, roots of about 2.5 to 6.0 cm in length; leaves 1 to 3 from each node,  
orbicular-reniform,  crenate,  base  cordate,  petioles  channelled  with  adnate  stipules;  
flowers fascicled umbels each carrying 3 or 4 flowers, short stalked; fruits cremocarp,  
ovoid, with laterally compressed seeds. 
b) Microscopic 
Root - Shows wavy outline, consisting of 3 to 5 layered, rectangular, cork cells  
having exfoliated cells, followed by 3 or 4 layers of parenchyma cells containing oval to  
round, simple, starch grains measuring 8 to 16  µ in dia., having centric hilum and  
microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate; secondary cortex composed of thin-walled,  
oval  to  polygonal,  parenchymatous  cells;  secretory  cells  present,  scattered  towards  
periphery region; secondary phloem and secondary xylem consisting of usual elements;  
vessels lignified with reticulate and spiral thickening; pith nearly obliterated. 
69Stem - More or less concave-convex outline, shows single layered epidermis composed  
of  round  to  cubical  cells  covered  by  striated  cuticle;  below  this  2  or  3  layers  of  
collenchymatous  cells,  followed  by  6  to  8  layers  of  thin-walled,  isodiametric,  
parenchymatous  cells  with  intercellular  spaces  present;  vascular  bundles  collateral,  
open, arranged in a ring, capped by patches of sclerenchyma and traversed by wide  
medullary  rays;  vessels  with  spiral  thickening  present,  resin  duct  present  in  
parenchymatous cells of cortex and generally one in between vascular bundles; pith of  
isodiametric, parenchyma with intercellular spaces.
Leaf-
Petiole - shows a characteristic outline due to two projections adjacent to ventral groove;  
epidermis  single  layered,  cells  cubical  covered  by  a  thick  cuticle;  inner  walls  of  
epidermal cells adjoining the cortex much thickened; hairs absent; collenchyma 2 or 3  
layered, absent on the projections, a broad zone of more or less rounded parenchyma  
cells present with intercellular spaces, and a few containing rosette crystals of calcium  
oxalate; resin canal present on dorsal side of each vascular bundle except in the vascular  
bundles occurring projecting arms; vascular bundles seven in number, two of which less  
developed and present in projections. 
Midrib - show a single layered epidermis, 2 or 3 layered collenchyma on both surfaces, 4  
or  5  layered  parenchyma, mostly  devoid  of  chloroplasts;  central zone occupied  by  
vascular bundles differentiated into xylem towards ventral side and phloem towards  
dorsal side; phloem consisting of sieve tubes, companion cells and phloem parenchyma;  
xylem consisting of radial rows of vessels with xylem parenchyma in between. 
Lamina -shows an epidermis of tangentially elongated cells on both surfaces, larger on  
the upper surface, covered by striated cuticle; mesophyll differentiated into 2 or 3 layers  
of palisade cells, 5 to 7 layers of loosely arranged, somewhat isodiametric spongy  
parenchyma; rosette crystals of calcium oxalate present in a few cells; stomata more on  
the  lower  surface,  anisocytic  in  general,  but  anomocytic  type  also  occurs  on  both  
surfaces, palisade ratio 3 to 5, stomatal index on upper surface, 9 to 12, and lower  
surface 11 to 17. 
Fruit  - Shows several ridges in outline; epicarp consists of single layered epidermis  
covered  externally  with  thick  cuticle;  mesocarp  consists  of  polygonal,  thin  walled  
parenchymatous cells having patches of sclerenchymatous cells on both lateral side;  
each ridge having a vittae and patch of sclerenchyma; endocarp consists of columnar  
shaped sclereids arranged in wavy layers; endosperm and embryo composed of oval to  
polygonal, thin-walled parenchymatous cells. 
Powder  - Green to greenish-brown, shows fragments of epidermal cells polygonal in  
surface view with stomata, palisade cells, vessels with spiral, reticulate and annular  
70thickening; microsphenoidal and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; simple, oval to  
round starch grains measuring 8 to 16 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   17   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform : Methanol  
(80 :20) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.72 and 0.85 (both  
blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf. 0.08, 0.16, 0.32, 0.72, 0.85  
and 0.96 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the  
plate at 105°C for ten minutes seven spots appear at Rf. 0.08 (grey), 0.16 (blue), 0.23  
(grey), 0.32 (violet), 0.72, 0.85 (both violet) and 0.96 (violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycosides - Saponin Glycosides
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Sara 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya, D¢pana, H¤dya, Kaphapittahara, M®dhya, Var¸ya, ViÀaghna,  
Svarya, Rasay¡na, AyuÀya, Sm¤tiprada 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Brahma Ras¡yana 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - á°tha, Aruci, Jvara, K¡sa, Kandu, Ku¿¶ha, Pra Raktapitta, M®ha,  
Sva¿a, P¡ndu, Raktad°Àa 
DOSE  - 3-6 gm.  
   
  
7130. Mayyaku (Gall.) 
MËYYAKU (Gall) 
M¡yakku  consists  of  dried  galls  found  on  Quercus  infectoria  Olivo  (Fam. 
Fagaceae), a small tree or shrub, 2 to 5 m high, native of Greece, Asia Minor, Syria and  
Iran. The galls are excrescences on the twigs, resulting from insect attack of the growing,  
rudimentary leaves; they are imported into India. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:M¡yaphala 
Assamese:Aphsa 
Bengali:Majoophal, Majuphal 
English:Oak-Gall 
Gujrati  :Muajoophal, Mayfal 
Hindi    :Maajoophal, Majuphal 
Kannada:Machikaai, Mapalakam 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Majakaanee, Mashikkay 
Marathi:Maayaphal 
Oriya   :Mayakku 
Punjabi:Maju 
Tamil   :Machakaai, Masikki, Mussikki 
Telugu  :Machikaaya 
Urdu    :Mazu, Mazuphal 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Galls spherical or pear-shaped, hard and brittle 1.2 to 2.5 cm in diameter having a  
short basal stalk and numerous rounded projections on the upper part of the gall; they  
usually sink in water; surface, smooth, rather shining, bluish-green, olive green or white  
brown, a few galls show the escape route of insect, in the form of a small rounded hole  
leading to a cylindrical canal which passes to the centre of the gall; taste, astringent,  
followed by sweetness; average weight of ten galls picked at random should not be less  
than 2.5 g. 
b) Microscopic 
Gall shows outer most zone of small thin-walled parenchymatous cells, irregular  
in shape; a ring of large, oval-shaped sclerenchymatous cells and a small inner zone of  
thick-walled parenchymatous cells present near the central cavity; outer zone of the  
parenchyma differentiated into three type of cells; uppermost small, irregular, thin-
walled, middle large, oval, and inner long parenchymatous cells, all having intercellular  
72spaces;  vascular  bundles  irregularly  distributed  in  this  region,  consisting  of  small  
patches of xylem and phloem; vessels with spiral and reticulate thickening; around the  
central cavity, a ring of sclerenchyma of great variation in shape and size, present, with  
rectangular, ovoid, elongated, small sclereids, having heavily thickened striated walls  
with  numerous  pits,  lumen  large,  usually  filled  with  dense  brown  material,  large  
sclereids are much elongated; a few rosette crystals of calcium oxalate in outer and  
middle region and prismatic crystals in inner parenchymatous cells present; starch grains  
simple and compound with central hilum, compound grains consisting of 2 to 5 or  
sometimes more components, simple grains round to oval, measuring upto 25 µ in dia, 
present abundantly in innermost zone of parenchyma. 
Powder -  Cream  colour;  shows  fragments  of  palisade-like  thin-walled  and  oval  to  
polygonal, thin-walled parenchymatous cells; sclereids with thickened and striated walls  
with numerous pits and vessels with reticulate and spiral thickening; simple, round to  
oval starch grains, measuring upto 25 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
Foreign matter                                                     Nil            Appendix 2.2.2 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     60   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     55   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Total Tannin content                    Not less than     50   per cent, 
                                                       when determined by the following method:   
 
ASSAY 
Approximately 2 gms. of powdered fruit, accurately weighed, was refluxed twice  
for  two  hrs.  with  alcohol  (95%)  on  a  water  bath  and  filtered.  The  extract  was  
concentrated  almost  to  dryness,  the  residue  was  taken  up  in  50  ml  of  water  in  a  
separating funnel and extracted four times with 20 ml of solvent ether, collecting the  
upper ethereal layer in each case in a separating funnel. The combined ethereal layer  
was extracted twice with 10 ml of water and aqueous extract was combined with original  
aqueous extract. The combined aqueous extract was saturated with sodium chloride and  
shaken with successive quantities of 25, 20, 20, 15 ml of ethyl acetate until complete  
extraction of the tannins was effected (tested by Ferric chloride reagent). 
The combined ethylacetate layer containing the tannins was filtered through a  
cotton plug (previously soaked with ethyl acetate). The filter was washed with 5 ml of  
ethylacetate and mixed with the original filtrate. The solvent was then distilled on a  
water bath and when the volume was reduced to about 10 ml, it was quantitatively  
transferred to a tared glass dish, the solvent removed on a boiling water bath and residue  
dried to constant weight at 90 ºC. The residue gives the weight of the tannins present in  
the drug. 
73T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using Chloroform: Ethylacetate :  
Formic acid (5:4:1) shows in visible light three spots at Rf. 0.60, 0.69 & 0.78 (all grey).  
Under U.V. (366 nm) three fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.60, 0.69 & 0.78 (all  
grey). On exposure to Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.60, 0.69, 0.78, 0.84 &  
0.96 (all yellow). On spraying with Ferric chloride reagent four spots appear at Rf. 0.13,  
0.60, 0.69 & 0.78 (all greyish blue).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannic Acid, Starch and Sugars
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, D¢pani, Gr¡hi 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Madayanty¡di C£rna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Ar¿a, Atis¡ra, Graha¸i, Mukha R°ga, Pravahika, Danta Roga, Y°ni  
Kanda, Sveta Pradara 
DOSE  - 1-3 gm of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
7431. Mudgaparni (W.P.) 
MUDGAPARÛI(Whole Plant) 
Mudgapar¸i   consists of dried whole plant of  Vigna trilobata  (L.) Verde. Syn. 
Phaseolus trilobus Ait . (Fam. Fabaceae), a prostrate or twining perennial herb, found wild,  
but also occasionally cultivated throughout the country as a forage crop. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Suryapar¸i, Saha 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Muganee 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Janglee Maga 
Hindi    :Janglee Mung 
Kannada:Abaregid 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kattuppayaru 
Marathi:Ranmug 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Mugvan 
Tamil   :Kattuppayaru, Panippayavu 
Telugu  :Pilla pesara 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Occurs in 2.5 to 15.0 cm long, 0.1 or 0.2 cm thick; cylindrical pieces, external  
surface brownish-grey, rough due to secondary roots; fracture, fibrous. 
 
 Stem -   Occurs in 12.0 to 55.0 cm long, 0.1 or 0.2 cm thick pieces, more or less  
cylindrical, grooved, slender, glabrous, pale green; fracture, fibrous
Leaf - Leaves alternate, pinnately trifoliate, petioled; leaflets palmately 3-lobed; 1.3 to  
2.5 cm long; mid lobe large, obovate spathulate, lateral lobe oblique and small, margin  
ciliate, apiculate, pale green in colour. 
Flower - Sessile or very shortly pedicelled; small, yellow with conspicuous persistent  
bracts and bracteole; calyx, gamosepalous, campanulate, 1 or 2 mm long, pale yellow,  
five toothed; corolla papilionaceous. 
Fruit - A pod; 2.5 to 6 or 7 cm long, 3 mm thick; greyish-black; linear or rarely oblong,  
75torose, subcylindrical, smooth glabrous, recurved or reflexed, 6 to 12 seeded. 
Seed - Grey, smooth, with 2 punctate, shortly linear hilum and without strophiole. 
b) Microscopic 
Root -  Shows a wavy outline, having single layered epidermis, consisting  of thick  
walled, parenchymatous cells, covered by thick cuticle; secondary cortex composed of 3  
to 6 layered, thin-walled, oval to polygonal, parenchymatous cells; peri cyclic fibres are  
present in a discontinuous ring; vascular bundles arranged in a ring; secondary phloem  
composed of thin-walled cells with brownish contents; secondary xylem consisting of  
usual elements; radially arranged, lignified, vessels with pitted or reticulate thickening,  
followed by pith consisting of thin-walled, oval to polygonal, parenchymatous cells. 
Stem - Shows a more or less wavy outline; epidermis single layered consisting of thin  
walled,  parenchymatous  cells;  secondary  cortex  consisting  of  2  to  5  layers  
collenchyrnatous and 1 or 2 layers of parenchymatous thin walled cells; peri cycle  
present in form of a discontinuous ring; vascular bundles arranged in a ring; secondary  
phloem  consisting of compactly arranged, thick-walled cells, having usual elements  
traversed  by  phloem  rays;  secondary  xylem  composed  of  usual  elements;  lignified  
vessels radially arranged, showing pitted and spiral thickenings; crystal fibres absent;  
xylem fibres moderately thick walled with narrow lumen and blunt tips, central region  
occupied by pith consisting of thin-walled, circular, parenchymatous cells. 
Leaf-
Midrib - shows single layered epidermis having a few unicellular, pointed hairs on both  
surfaces, 6 or 7 layers, polygonal collenchyma cells on upper and 5 or 6 layers, thick  
walled, collenchyma on lower surface; a single layered thick-walled, lignified polygonal,  
sclerenchymatous cells present on either side of 'C' shaped vascular bundle having usual  
elements. 
Lamina  -  isobilateral,  shows  single  layered,  elongated,  baloon-shaped,  thin-walled,  
epidermis cells on both surfaces, a few unicellular hairs similar as in midrib present on  
both surfaces; stomata paracytic, present on both surfaces; palisade 2 or 3 layered on  
upper epidermis, 1 or 2 layered on lower epidermis; palisade ratio 6 or 7 on lower  
surface, 7 or 8 on upper surface; vein islet number 34 to 45; veinlet termination number  
20 to 33; stomatal index, 30 to 36 per sq. mm on lower surfaces, 20 to 27 per sq. mm on  
upper surface. 
Seed - Shows testa consisting of 2 or 3 layered, thick-walled, elongated, lignified stone  
cells having striations and narrow lumen; cotyledon composed of oval to polygonal, thin  
walled, parenchymatous cells. 
76Powder  -  Light  greyish-green;  shows  fragments  of  parenchyma,  unicellular  pointed  
broken hairs; lignified, simple pitted, reticulate or spiral vessels; paracytic stomata,  
epidermal cells in surface view with wavy outline. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11.5 per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     11   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica Gel 'G' using n-Butanol : Acetic acid: Water  
(4:1:5) shows under UV (366 nm) five fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.35, 0.42, 0.58, 0.70 and  
0.82 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf. 0.30, 0.42, 0.50,  
0.58,0.70 and 0.82 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent  
and on heating the plate for ten munutes at 105 ° C five spots appear at Rf. 0.30, 0.42,  
0.58, 0.70 and 0.82 (all yellow). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sterols.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Pittahara, áukrala, CakÀusya, Kaphahara, Rasayana, ViÀaghna, áukrad
°Àahara, Garbhasth¡pana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Mahan¡r¡ya¸a Taila, Am¤tapr¡¿a Gh¤ta, A¿°ka Gh¤ta,  
Vid¡ryadi Gh¤ta, Dh¡nvantara Taila, Brahma Rasayana,  
Bala Taila, Ratnagiri Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Jvara, K¡sa, K¤mi, KÀaya, KuÀ¶ha, Pradara, V¡tarakta, Daha, Pitta  
D¡ha, Mu¿ika ViÀa, KÀata á°tha, Madya T¤À¸a. 
DOSE  - 3-5 gm.  
   
  
7732. Munditika (W.P.)  
MUNDÌTAKË (Whole Plant) 
Mund¢tak¡ consists of dried whole plant of  Sphaeranthus indicus  Linn.  (Fam. 
Asteraceae), an aromatic, much branched herb, 30 to 60 cm high found abundantly in damp  
places throughout the country, ascending to an altitude of 1,500 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Mundi, Sravani, Bhumikadamba 
Assamese:Kamadarus 
Bengali:Surmuriya, Mudmudiya 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Gorakhmundi 
Hindi    :Mundi, Gorakhmundi 
Kannada:Mudukattanagida, Karande 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Manni 
Marathi:Mundi, Gorakhmundi 
Oriya   :Bhuikadam 
Punjabi:Gorakhmunda 
Tamil   :Karandai 
Telugu  :Bodasarumu Badataramu 
Urdu    :Mundi 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Pieces 5 to 15 cm long and 0.3 to 0.5 cm thick, a few branching; smooth, slender,  
somewhat laterally flattened, greyish-brown; fracture, short; odour not characteristic;  
taste, slightly bitter. 
Stem - Pieces 10 to 30 cm long, 0.2 to 0.4 cm thick, branched, cylindrical or somewhat  
flattened with toothed wings, rough due to longitudinal wrinkles, externally brownish  
black to brownish-green, internally creamish-grey; fracture, fibrous; odour nil, taste,  
bitter. 
Leaf - Sessile, decurrent, 2 to 7 cm long, 1 to 1.5 cm wide, obovate-oblong, narrowed at  
the base, dentate or serrate, hairy, greenish-brown; odourless; taste, bitter. 
Flower - Globose, head about 1.5 cm long and about one cm in diameter; purplish-brown  
with  linear  involucral  bracts  which  are  shorter  than  the  head  and  ciliate  at  apex;  
peduncle with toothed wings; outer female flowers 12 to 16, inner bisexual 2 or 3,  
corolla of female 2 toothed, ovary, inferior, carpels 2, style - arms connate. 
78Fruit - Achene, smooth, stalked.
b) Microscopic 
Root  - Epidermis single layered, rectangular; secondary cortex composed of oval to  
tangentially elongated, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells having aerenchyma; secondary  
phloem composed of thin-walled, oval to polygonal cells, a large number of groups of  
lignified  phloem  fibres  found  scattered  in  this  zone;  central  portion  occupied  by  
lignified, secondary xylem having usual elements; vessels simple pitted; starch grains  
simple, round to oval with concentric striations and distinct hilum. measuring 13 to 27 µ 
in dia., present in secondary cortex. 
Stem - Epidermis single layered covered with thick cuticle; cortex consisting of 4 to 6  
layers of oval to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; endodermis single layers  
of  barrel-shaped  cells;  pericyclic  fibres,  lignified  arranged  in  discontinuous  ring;  
secondary phloem  narrow, having usual elements; groups of cellulosic fibres found  
scattered in this zone; secondary xylem composed of usual elements; vessels with spiral  
thickening or simple pitted; pith very wide composed of oval to polygonal, thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells. 
Leaf-
Midrib - epidermis single layered, followed by 4 to 6 layered collenchyma and 3 or 4  
layered parenchyma cells present on both surfaces; trichomes both non-glandular and  
glandular,  present  on  both  surfaces,  glandular  trichomes  2  or  3  cells  high,  uni  or  
biseriate stalk, having a multicellular head; non-glandular trichomes uniseriate with 2 to  
5 cells, vascular bundle 3 or 4, situated centrally having usual elements. 
Lamina  -  epidermis  single  layered  having  numerous  non-glandular  and  glandular  
trichomes similar to those present in midrib; mesophyll composed of oval to polygonal  
thin  walled  parenchymatous  cells  and  not  differentiated  into  palisade  and  spongy  
parenchyma cells, anisocytic stomata present on both surfaces; stomatal index 32 to 38  
on lower surfaces, 20 to 29 on upper surfaces; stomatal number 47 to 54 per sq. mm on  
lower surfaces, 15 to 22 per sq. mm on upper surfaces; vein islet number 20 to 26. 
Powder  -  Greyish-yellow;  shows  fragments  of  thin-walled,  oval  to  polygonal  
aerenchyma  cells;  thin-walled,  sinuous,  elongated  epidermal  cells;  small  pieces  of  
glandular trichomes; a few anisocytic stomata; vessels with spiral and pitted thickening;  
fibres short, thick walled, lignified with wide lumen and blunt tips having simple pits;  
oval to round, elliptic, simple starch grains with centric hilum and striations, measuring  
13 to 27 µ in diameter. 
79IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   23   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   9    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  alcoholic  extract  of  the  drug  on  Silica  gel  'G'  using  Toluene  .:  
Ethylacetate (9:1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent spots at Rf. 0.54 and 0.76  
both green. On exposure to Iodine vapour one spot appears at Rf. 0.44 (brown). On  
spraying  with  5%  Methanolic-Sulphuric  acid  reagent  and  heating  the  plate  for  10  
minutes at 105°C five spots appear at Rf. 0.20 (violet), 0.25 (blue), 0.44, 0.54 and 0.59  
(all violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential Oil, Sterols and Alkaloids
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :M®dhya,  Rasayana,  Rucya,  Svarya,  V¡tahara,  ViÀaghna,  
Kaphapittanuta 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Ratnagiri Rasa, Mundi Arka, V¡tagaj¡nku¿a Rasa, Nava  
Ratnraya M¤g¡nka Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  Apasm¡ra,  Chardi,  K¡sa,  M£trak¤cchra,  P¡n·u,  Pram®ha,  
V¡tarakta,  Apau,  K¤mi  R°ga,  Y°ni  R°ga,  Ëm¡t¢s¡ra,  Sl
¢pada, Plihar°ga, M®d°r°ga, Guda R°ga 
DOSE  - 10-20 ml Svarasa  
   
  
8033. Nyagrodha Jata (Ar.Rt.)  
NYAGRODHA JAÙA  (Aerial Root) 
Nyagrodha  Ja¶a consists  of  dried  aerial  of  Ficus  bengalensis  Linn.  (Fam. 
Moraceae), a very large tree with spreading branches, occurring  throughout the country,  
and also planted on road sides and in gardens.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Vata Ja¶a, Bahup¡da 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Bar, Bot 
English:Banyan Tree 
Gujrati  :Vad Vadavai 
Hindi    :Baragada jata, Valajatta 
Kannada:Alada Chirugu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Peralveru 
Marathi:Vada Paranika 
Oriya   :Bara gachha 
Punjabi:Bardajattu 
Tamil   :Alamvizhuthu 
Telugu  :Peddamatti, Marri Udalu 
Urdu    :Bargad 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in cut pieces, 4 to 8 cm long, 0.1 to 1.2 cm thick, cylindrical,  
unbranched or branched; rough due to longitudinal and transverse cracks and transverse  
rows of lenticels; external surface grey; cut surface reddish-brown; fracture, fibrous in  
bark portion and tough and short in wood portion. 
b) Microscopic 
Aerial root shows cork consisting of 4 to 6 or more rows of narrow, tangentially  
elongated cells; secondary cortex consisting of a zone of 4 or 5 rows of stone cells,  
followed by wide zone of thin-walled parenchymatous cells, filled with reddish-brown  
contents; a number of large groups of stone cells, oval to elliptical, elongated, thick-
walled, with wide lumen and clear pit canals found scattered throughout secondary  
cortex; secondary phloem a wide zone consisting of sieve tubes, phloem fibres and  
phloem parenchyma, traversed by phloem rays; phloem fibres numerous, arranged in  
tangential bands alternating with sieve elements; secondary xylem very wide consisting  
of pitted xylem vessels, fibres and xylem parenchyma, all elements being lignified;  
81vessels single or in groups, xylem parenchyma numerous, xylem fibres numerous, thick-
walled with blunt tips and wide lumen; xylem rays numerous, uni to tetraseriate. 
Powder - Reddish-brown; shows oval to elliptical, elongated, thick-walled stone cells  
with wide lumen and clear pit canals; fibres, thick-walled with blunt tips and wide  
lumen; xylem vessels showing pitted thickening.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using Toluene: Ethyl acetate (7:3)  
shows under U.V. (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.34 (sky blue), 0.63 (sky  
blue) and 0.78 (blue). On spraying with 10% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid regent and on  
heating the plate for about ten minute at 105 °C three spots appear at Rf. 0.63 (grey),  
0.78 (brownish grey) and 0.96 (brown). 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Gr¡hi,  Sthambhaka,  Pittahara,  Kaphahara,  Var¸a,  
Bhaghnasandh¡nakara, á°dhana, R°pana, K®¿ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - Kumkum¡di Taila, Rasa Sindhura, Abhraka Bhasma  
(M¡ra¸a),  Svar¸a  Sindhura,  N¡ga  Bhasma,  Vanga  
Bhasma (Jara¸¡rtha), Taila Moorchana 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  D¡ha,  Visarpa,  Rakta  Pitta,  T¤Àna,  Y°niroga,  Med°roga,  
Bhagandara 
DOSE  - 2-5 gm of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
8234. Nimbu (Fr.Ft.)  
NIMBÍ  (Fresh Fruit) 
Nimb£ consists of fresh fruit of Citrus limon (Linn.) Burm. f. Syn. C. medica var. 
limonum (Fam. Rutaceae); a straggling bush or small tree, 3 to 4 m high with thorny  
branches, cultivated in many parts of the country in orchards.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Jamb¢ra, M¡ha Nimbu 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Patinebu, Kagghinebu, Baranebu 
English:The lemon of India, Lemon 
Gujrati  :Limbu 
Hindi    :Nimbu, Bara Nimbu, Pakari Nimbu 
Kannada:Nimbe, Lime hannu, Nimbe hannu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Cherunakaram, Vadukappulinarakam 
Marathi:Nimbu 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Nimbu 
Tamil   :Elumichai, Elumichangai, Elumicchai, Cherunaranka 
Telugu  :Pedda Nimma, Jambira, Nimmu, Bijapuram 
Urdu    :Limu, Neebu 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit a berry, hesperidium, yellow when ripe, ovoid or globose, 5 to 10 cm long;  
external  surface  even  or  rugged  showing  openings  of  oil  glands;  usually  with  9  
mammillate extremity and thin rind; transversely cut surface shows thin rind and an  
inwardly grown endocarp forming 10 to 12 segments, each containing 2 or 3 seeds with  
pulp formed by succulent hairs; juice acidic. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Amla 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Amla 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphahara, Pittakara, V¡tahara, P¡cana  
 
83IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - V¡ri¿°Àa¸a Rasa, Vasanta M¡lati Rasa, Vanga Bhasma,  
K¡s¢sa  Bhasma,  Gandhaka  Va¶i,  áankha  Va¶i,  Aj
¢rnakanaka  Rasa,  Kalak£ta  Rasa,  Maha¿a´kha  Vati,  
N¡sika C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Agnim¡ndya, Aruci, Chardi, K¤mi, T¤Àa, Vibandha, V¡tika á£la,  
Udara Roga, Vi¿£cika 
DOSE  - 6-12 gm of the drug in juice form.  
   
  
8435. Nirgundi (Rt.)  
NIRGUNÚI (Root) 
Nirgun·i consists of dried root of Vitex negundo Linn. (Fam. Verbenaceae), a large  
aromatic shrub or sometimes a small tree, upto 4.5 m in height, common throughout the  
country ascending to an altitude of 1500 m in the lower Himalayas.It is common in waste  
places around village, river bank, moist localities and deciduous forests.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:-- 
Assamese:Aslak 
Bengali:Nirgundi, Nishinda 
English:Five leaved chaste, Indian Privet 
Gujrati  :Nagod 
Hindi    :Nirgundi 
Kannada:Lakkigida, Nekkigida, Lakkimara 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Indranee 
Marathi:Lingad, Nigad 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Sambhalu 
Tamil   :Karuno chchil 
Telugu  :Nallavavilli 
Urdu    :Sambhalu 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Roots cylindrical, hard, tough with irregular fractures; external surface rough due  
to  longitudinal,  narrow,  cracks  and  small  rootlets;  cut  surface  shows  cork  region  
greyishbrown, middle region greyish-white, and xylem region cream coloured; bark  
thin, easily separates from wood; wood hard, forming major part of root. 
b) Microscopic 
Root  shows  10  to  18  or  more  tangential  rows  of  rectangular  to  cubicular,  
moderately thick-walled cork cells with a few rows of radially arranged cork cells also  
being present, inner 3 to 5 rows of cork cells thin-walled; cork cambium consists of  
single row of squarish to transversely elongated cells; secondarycortex composed of 4 to  
12 rows of rectangular to elongated cells, some contain starch grains; numerous, small  
groups of stone cells found scattered in this zone; stone cells vary in shape and size;  
secondary phloem consists of sieve tubes with companion cells, fibres and phloem  
parenchyma traversed by phloem rays; distal portion of phloem conical, due to dilating  
85phloem rays; each band of phloem composed of thin-walled, phloem tissues alternating  
with  transverse  strips  of  thick-walled  phloem  fibres;  a  few  tangential  strips  of  
obliterated  phloem  tissues  also  present  in  outer-phloem  region;  each  fibre  group  
composed  of  6  to  60  or  more  thick-walled,  long  and  short  fibres,  short  fibres  
comparatively  thick-walled,  a  few  fibres  show  forked  tips;  inner  zone  of  phloem  
composed of intact, thin-walled, phloem tissues mainly sieve tubes, companion cells and  
phloem  parenchyma; cambium composed  of one, or  sometimes two, rows of cells;  
central major part of root consists of xylem; vessels varying in size, scattered throughout  
xylem region, either in small groups of 2 to 4 or singly; a few xylem vessels show tail  
on one or both the ends; xylem fibres long, having thick-walls and pointed tips; xylem  
parenchyma contains starch grains similar to those found in cortical region; medullary  
rays are uni-to triseriate, almost straight, extend from pith to cork, medullary rays in  
xylem region radial while in phloem region they dilate; cells contain starch grain, simple  
and compound, oval to circular, having 4 components and measuring 8 to 12 µ in dia.
Powder - Pale yellow; shows parenchymatous cells containing simple oval to round and  
compound starch grains with 4 components, measuring 8 to 12  µ in dia; stone cells  
elongated, rectangular and squarish in shape with wide and narrow lumen, radiating  
canals and conspicuous striations; xylem vessels with pitted thickening, xylem and  
phloem fibres with thick walls.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.2  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using Chloroform: Methanol (8:2)  
shows in visible light two spots at Rf. 0.14 and 0.95 (both yellow). Under U.V. (366 nm)  
six fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.14 (dirty yellow), 0.14  (blue), 0.66 (blue), 0.82  
(light blue), 0.90 (blue) and 0.95 (bluish green). On exposure to Iodine vapour five spots  
appear at Rf. 0.14, 0.04 , 0.66, 0.82 and 0.95 (all yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff  
reagent followed by 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent two spots appear at Rf. 0.03  
and 0.95 (both orange).
86PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a (Nila), á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :V¡tahara, Pittavin¡¿ana, Ke¿ya, Netrya, Sl®Àmaha, P¢d¡hara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  M¡haviÀagarbha Taila, M¡nasa Mitra Vaaka 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Ëdhm¡na, K¡sa, K¤mi R°ga, Ku¿¶ha, Pradara, á£la R°ga, Ka¸·u,  
áleÀmaja Jvara 
DOSE  - 10-20 ml. 
   
  
8736. Palasa (Fl.)  
PALAáA ( Flower) 
Pala¿a consists of dried flower of  Butea monosperma  (Lam.) Kuntze, Syn.  B. 
frondosa Koeing ex Roxb. (Fam. Fabaceae), an erect deciduous tree 12 to 15 m high with  
crooked trunk and irregular branches, commonly found throughout the greater part of the  
country upto about 915 m altitude. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Kim¿uka, Brahma V¤kÀa 
Assamese:Palash 
Bengali:Palas, Palash Gaccha 
English:Flame of the Forest 
Gujrati  :Khakharo, Kesuda 
Hindi    :Dhak, Tesu, Paras 
Kannada:Muttug, Muttulu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Palashinsamatha 
Marathi:Kakracha, Palas 
Oriya   :Porasu, Kijuko 
Punjabi:Tesh 
Tamil   :Purasu 
Telugu  :Modyga Puvvu 
Urdu    :Dhak (Tesu) 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug available in about 3.0 to 4.5 cm long racemes of orange to yellow coloured  
flowers; bracts and bracteoles small, pedicels about twice as long as the calyx, densely  
brown-velvety; calyx 0.8 to 1.2 cm long, sepals 5, campanulate, densely velvety outside,  
clothed with silky hairs within; corolla about 2.0 to 7.0 cm long, petals 5, polypetalous,  
unequal keel, clothed outside with silky silvery hairs, orange or salmon coloured, keel  
semicircular, beaked, veined; stamens 10, diadelphous, anthers 2 celled; carpel superior  
unilocular; style one and stigma one. 
b) Microscopic 
Pedicel - Shows more or less wavy outline, single layered epidermis covered  
with  thick  cuticle,  unicellular, 2  or  3  celled  trichomes,  followed  by  ground  tissue  
consisting  of  6  to  8  celled,  thin-walled,  oval  to  polygonal  parenchymatous  cells;  
endodermis single layered; vascular bundle radially arranged, collateral, consisting of  
usual elements.
88Sepal -  Shows single layered epidermal cells, uniseriate, multicellular trichomes and  
club shaped secretory ducts present on lower surface,  epidermis followed by 3 or 4  
layered,  thin-walled,  loosely  arranged  parenchymatous  cells  on  both  surfaces,  thin  
walled, wavy epidermal cells showing on the surface view.
Petal - Shows single layered, thin-walled, epidermal cells, covered with numerous,  
unicellular, pointed trichomes and a few glandular hairs; thin-walled, capitate or cone  
shaped papillae present on both surface; mesophyll consisting of thin-walled, loosely  
arranged,  parenchymatous  cells;  a  large  number  of  larger  and  smaller  vein  found  
scattered in this region, some of the cells contain a few of oil globules.
Powder - Yellowish-brown; shows fragments of parenchyma, epidermis with stomatal  
cells; numerous, pointed, multicellular trichomes and a few oil globules.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol  
Acetic Acid: Water (4:1:5) shows in visible light six spots at Rf. 0.42 (light brown), 0.48  
(brown), 0.58 (yellow), 0.82 (brown), 0.88 (yellow) and 0.96 (light brown). On spraying  
with phosphomolybdic acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for about ten minutes  
nine spots appear at Rf. 0.08 (blue), 0.19 (blue), 0.32 (blue), 0.42 (blue), 0.48 (yellow),  
0.58 (blue), 0.82 (yellow), 0.88 (blue) and 0.96 (blue). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-
Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for about fifteen minutes seven  
spots appear at Rf. 0.19 (light red), 0.32 (light red), 0.42 (light red), 0.58 (red), 0.82  
(red), 0.88 (red) and 0.96 (grey). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycosides and Flavonoids
 
89PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, Sara 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :T¤À¸asamaka, D¢pana, Gr¡hi, Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¡tahara, Rakta  
Stambhana, M£trala, KuÀ¶aghna, Sandh¡niya, D¡hapra¿amana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Ku´kumadi Taila, Vanga Bhasma (J¡ra¸a(b)) 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - ArÀa, D¡ha, Graha¸i, Gulma, K¤mi, KuÀ¶ha, M®ha, Mutrak¤cchra,  
Raktapitta,  Raktavik¡ra,  T¤Àa,  V¡ta  Rakta,  Gr¡¶hi,  Pl¢haroga,  
N®tra¿£la, Kan·u 
DOSE  - 3-6 gm of drug in powder form. 
   
  
9037. Palasa (Gum.)  
PALAáA (Gum) 
Pala¿a consists of dried gum exuding from natural cracks and artificial incisions in  
the stem bark of Butea monosperma (Lam.) Kuntze Syn. B. frondosa Koen. ex Roxb. (Fam.  
Fabaceae), a medium sized tree with somewhat crooked trunk, 12 to 15 m high with  
irregular branches commonly found throughout greater parts of the country upto 915 m  
altitude.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Kim¿uka, Tripar¸a 
Assamese:Palash 
Bengali:Palas 
English:Flame of forest, Bengal Kino 
Gujrati  :Khakharo, Kesudo 
Hindi    :Dhak, Palas, Teshu 
Kannada:Mattuga, Muthuga 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Palashu 
Marathi:Palas 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Dhak 
Tamil   :Purasu 
Telugu  :Moduga, Modugu 
Urdu    :Dhak (Tesu) 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in pieces, flattish, brittle, perfectly transparent, smooth and shining,  
ruby red to dark brown; buff coloured pieces of bark attached; no peculiar odour; taste,  
astringent.
b) Microscopic 
Angular fragments, opaque in transmitted light; shows plants debris form thick -
walled rectangular cork and polygonal, thin-walled cortex, and phloem parenchymatous  
cells, depved from the parent plant. 
Identification: It dissolves partially in boiling alcohol and freely, almost completely, in  
cold  water,  forming.  a  milky  solution;  when  treated  with  5%  aqueous  solution  of  
perchloride of iron (Ferric chloride) it gives greyish-green precipitate and with lead  
acetate gives white precipitate.
91Fluorescence: Colour of 5% aqueous solution light brown in day light and greyish green  
in U.V. light (366 nm); colour of 5% alcoholic solution reddish-brown in daylight, and  
light green in U.V. light (366 nm).
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     69   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     63   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (5:1:4) shows in visible light six spots at Rf. 0.30, 0.42, 0.67, 0.74, 0.84 and  
0.92 (all yellowish brown). Under U.V. (366 nm) three blue fluorescent zones are visible  
at Rf. 0.74, 0.84 and 0.92. On exposure to Iodine vapour eight spots appear at Rf. 0.07,  
0.23,  0.30,  0.42,  0.67,  0.74,  0.84  and  0.92  (all  yellow).  On  spraying  with  5%  
MethanolicSulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at 110 °C 
eight spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.23, 0.30, 0.42, 0.67, 0.74, 0.84 and 0.92 (all violet).
CONSTITUENTS  -  Anthocyanins and Tannins.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Sara, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :áleÀmahara, D¢pana, V¡tahara, V¤Àya, Bhagnasandhanak¤t 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Bala Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  Ar¿a,  Graha¸i,  Gulma,  K¤mi  R°ga,  Gudar°ga,  Asthibhagna,  
Vrana, Pl¢ha R°ga. 
DOSE  - 0.5 to 1.5 gm.  
   
  
9238. Palasa (Sd.)  
PALAáA (Seed) 
Pala¿a   consists of  dried  seed  of  Butea  monosperma  (Lam.)  Kuntze,  Syn.  B. 
frondosa Koen. ex Roxb. (Fam. Fabaceae), a medium sized tree with a somewhat crooked  
trunk, 12 to 15 m high with irregular branches, commonly found throughout the greater  
part of the country upto about 915 m altitude. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Brahma V¤kÀa, Kim¿uka, Rakta PuÀpaka, KÀ¡ra áreÀa 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Palash Gachha 
English:Bengal Kinotree 
Gujrati  :Kesudo, Khakharo 
Hindi    :Dhak, Palash 
Kannada:Muttuga 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Palashu 
Marathi:Palash 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Dhak, Palash, Tesoo, Kesoo 
Tamil   :Purashu 
Telugu  :Moduga mada 
Urdu    :Dhak (Tesu) 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seed flat, kidney-shaped, 2.5 to 4 cm long, 1 to 3 cm wide, dark reddish-brown,  
thin, glossy; hilum clear, situated near middle of concave edge 'of seed; odour, faint;  
taste, slightly acrid and bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Shows a wide zone of testa, consisting of a layer of palisade cells, a row of  
bearer  cells  and  many  layers  of  parenchymatous  cells;  palisade  cells  compactly  
arranged, columnar shaped and covered with thick cuticle, followed by a single row of  
bearer  cells;  parenchymatous  layers  consisting  of  many  rows  of  cells,  filled  with  
reddish-brown contents; a number of vascular bundles occur in a row, in middle region  
of parenchymatous zone; cotyledons consists of a single layered epidermis, composed of  
square to oval cells, covered with cuticle; mesophyll cells bear hyaline walls, oval to  
irregular shaped with small intercellular spaces; simple, oval to round, starch grains  
with  concentric  striations,  and  centric  hilum,  compound  grains  having  2  to  4  
93components measuring 8 to 16 µ in dia., present in cotyledons. 
Powder - Cream or grey; shows fragments of testa, bearer cells, numerous simple oval to  
round starch grains with concentric striations and a centric hilum, and also compound  
starch grains having 2 to 4 components, measuring 8 to 16 µ in diameter. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     25   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Hexane soluble extractive          Not less than     15   per cent.               
(By soxhlet extraction)                                                               
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene:  
Ethylacetate (9:1) shows under U.V. light (366 nm) three fluorescent at Rf. 0.41, 0.49 to  
0.65 (elongated and light blue) and 0.91 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots  
appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.19, 0.28, 0.41, 0.49 to 0.65 (elongated) and 0.91 (all yellow). On  
spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes  
at 110°C six spots appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.19, 0.28, 0.41, elongated spot (0.49-0.65) and  
0.91 (all violet). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent followed by 5% Methanolic-
Sulphuric acid reagent three spots appear at Rf. 0.41, 0.49 to 0.65 (elongated) and 0.91  
(all light orange).
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil, Enzymes and small quantities of Resins and Alkaloids.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Sara, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana,  Kaphahara,  Pittahara,  Sangr¡hi,  V¡tahara,  V¤Àya,  
Asthisandh¡naka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - Ayask¤ti,  K¤mimudgara  Rasa,  Khrimikuth¡ra  Rasa,  
Pal¡¿a B¢ja C£r¸a, Pal¡¿a Arka 
 
94THERAPEUTIC USES  - ArÀa, Graha¸i, Gulma, Ka¸·u, Pram®ha, Vra¸a, K¤miroga, Basti  
Roga,  Pl¢ha  Roga,  Dadru,  Tvak  Roga,  Timira  Roga,  
N®tr¡bhiÀyanda, Garbhadhananiv¡ra¸¡rtha. 
DOSE  - 3 gm of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
9539. Parpata (W.P.)  
PARPAÙA  (Whole Plant) 
Parpa¶a  consists  of  dried  whole  plant  of  Fumaria  parviflora  Lam.  (Fam. 
Fumaraceae), a pale green, branched, annual, diffuse herb, about 60 em high, distributed as  
a weed of cultivated fields over the greater parts of the country, and also commonly  
growing on road sides during cold season. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Var¡¶ika, SukÀmapatra 
Assamese:Shahtaraj 
Bengali:Vanshulpha, Bansulpha 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Pittapapada, Pitpapado, Pittapapado 
Hindi    :Pittapapada, Dhamgajra, Pittapapara 
Kannada:Kallu Sabbasige, Parpatu, Chaturasigide 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Pittapapada, Shatara, Parpat 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Shahtara, Pittapapara 
Tamil   :Tura, Tusa 
Telugu  :Parpatakamu 
Urdu    :Parpata  
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Buff or cream coloured, branched, about 3 mm thick, cylindrical; taste, bitter. 
Stem - Light green, smooth, diffused, hollow, about 2 to 4 mm thick; taste, bitter and  
slightly acrid. 
Leaf - Compound, pinnatifid, 5 to 7 cm long, divided into narrow segments; segments 5  
mm long and about 1 mm broad, linear or oblong, more or less glaucous, acute or  
subacute; petiole, very thin, 2.5 to 4.0 cm long; taste, bitter. 
Flower - Racemes with 10 to 15 flowers, peduncle upto 3 mm, pedicels about 2 mm,  
flowers about 7 mm long, bract much longer than the pedicels; sepals 2, white, minute,  
about 0.5 mm long, triangular ovate, acuminate; corolla in 2 whorls with very small 4  
petals, each about 4 mm long; inner petals with a purple or green tip; outer petals with  
96narrow spur, without purple spots stamens 3+3 , staminal sheath subulate above, about 4  
mm long, stigma 2 lipped.
Fruit  -  Capsule,  2  mm  long  and  slightly  broader,  subrotund,  obovate,  obtuse  or  
subtruncate, obscurely apiculate, rugose when dry; nutlets globose, upto 2 mm long,  
single seeded. 
b) Microscopic 
Root  -  Root  shows  single  layered  epidermis,  followed  by  5  or  6  layers  of  cortex  
consisting of thin-walled, rectangular, parenchymatous cells, outer I or 2 layers irregular  
and  brown  in  colour;  endodermis  not  distinct;  secondary  phloem  very  narrow  and  
consisting of 2 or 3 rows with usual elements; central core shows a wide zone of xylem  
and consists  of  usual elements;  vessels mostly  solitary  having  reticulate and spiral  
thickening, medullary ray less developed and mostly uniseriate; fibres moderately long,  
thick-walled, having narrow lumen and blunt tips. 
Stem  -  Stem  shows  a  pentagonal  outline,  having  prominent  angles  composed  of  
collenchymatous  cells;  epidermis  single  layered  of  thin-walled,  oblong,  rectangular  
cells,  covered  with  thin  cuticle;  cortex  narrow,  composed  of  2  to  4  layers  of  
chlorenchymatous  cells endodermis  not  distinct;  vascular  bundles  collateral, 5 or  6  
arranged in a ring; each vascular bundle capped by a group of sclerenchymatous cells;  
phloem consists of usual elements; xylem consists of vessels, tracheids, fibres and xylem  
parenchyma; vessels much elongated, having reticulate, annular or spiral thickening or  
simple pits; xylem fibres narrow elongated with pointed ends having a few simple pits;  
centre  either  hollow  or  occupied  by  narrow  pith  consisting  of  thin walled, 
parenchymatous cells. 
Leaf
Petiole  -  V  -shaped  outline;  single  layer  epidermis  consisting  of  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells followed by ground tissue composed of thick-walled round, oval  
or polygonal, parenchymatous cells, outer cells smaller than inner; collenchymatous  
cells present at corners; three vascular bundle scattered in ground tissue, one central and  
two in wings;  vascular bundle  consists  of  phloem  and xylem, phloem  capped  with  
fibrous sheath, lower epidermis single layered. 
Lamina  -  Shows  single  layer  epidermis'  on  either  side,  consistmg  of  thin-walled,  
rectangular,  oval-shaped,  parenchymatous  cells;  mesophyll  composed  of  oval  to  
polygonal  thin-walled  parenchymatous  cells,  filled  with  green  pigment  and  not  
differentiated  into  palisade  and  spongy  parenchyma;  vascular  bundles  scattered  
throughout the mesophyll; stomata anomocytic, present on both surfaces. 
97Powder - Light greenish-brown; shows fragments of parenchyma; tracheids, fibres, and  
vessels having simple pits and spiral thickenings; anomocytic stomata and wavy walled  
epidermal cells in surface view.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   30   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     29   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  the  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  using  Chloroform  :  
Methanol (8:2) shows under visible light one spot at Rf. 0.93 (green). Under U.V. (366  
nm) eight fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.07 (blue), 0.13 (blue), 0.29 (light blue),  
0.50 (light pink), 0.60 (light yellow), 0.67 (yellow), 0.79 (blue) and 0.93 pink). On  
exposure to Iodine vapour twelve spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.10, 0.13, 0.19, 0.29, 0.50,  
0.60,0.67,0.74,0.79,0.86 and 0.93 (all yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent  
followed  by  5%  Methanolic-Sulphuric  acid  reagent  one  spot  appears  at  Rf.  0.07  
(orange).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids, Tannins, Sugars and salt of Potassium
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, Samgr¡hi, Raktad°Àahara, Rocaka  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Pacanam¤ta Kvatha C£r¸a, Tiktaka Gh¤ta, Mahatiktaka  
Gh¤ta, Nalpamar¡di Taila, BhrihatmaµjiÀ¡di Kvatha C
£rna,  Pa¶°l¡di  Gh¤ta,  Parpa¶¡di  Kvatha,  áada´gapan
¢ya, B¤hata Garbha, Cint¡ma¸i Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Bhrama, Chardi, D¡ha, Jvara, Raktapitta, Raktavik¡ra, T¤Àa, Mada,  
Gl¡ni 
DOSE  - 1-3 gm.  
   
9840. Patalai (St.Bk.)  
PËÙALAI   (Stem Bark) 
P¡¶alai consists of dried stem bark of Stereospermum chelonoides (L.f.) DC. (Fam. 
Bignoniaceae), a large deciduous tree upto 18 m high and about 1.8 m in girth with a clear  
bole of about 9 m, found throughout the moist parts of the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Pa¶ala, KhriÀnav¤¸a, Madhudui, T¡mrapuÀpi 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Paarul 
English:Trumpet Flower Tree, Yellow Snake Tree 
Gujrati  :Paadal 
Hindi    :Paraal, Paatar, Paadree, Paadhal 
Kannada:Rude, Kalludi, Kaala-adri 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Puppaatiri, Paatiri 
Marathi:Paadal 
Oriya   :Patudi 
Punjabi:Paadal 
Tamil   :Paadiri, Pumpaadiri, Paadari 
Telugu  :Kokkosa, Kaligottu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in cut pieces of varying sizes, upto 0.8 cm thick, slightly recurved  
and very slightly channelled; external surface rough due to ridges, fissures and lenticels;  
dull brown; when cut across it shows lamellations due to presence of concentric bands of  
phloem fibres; fracture, tough and short with inner lamellae occasionally peeling off;  
taste, not characteristic. 
b) Microscopic 
Cork consisting of about 8 to 22 layers of tangentially elongated, thin-walled,  
lignified, rectangular cells; cork cambium single layered of narrow cells; secondary  
cortex  very  wide,  composed  of  tangentially  elongated,  thick-walled,  polyhedral,  
isodiametric, parenchymatous cells with intercellular spaces having numerous, mostly  
groups  of  stone  cells  of  various  sizes,  fairly  large,  thick-walled,  lignified,  oval  to  
polygonal upto 180 µ long and upto 90 µ wide, pitted with clear striations and with wide  
lumen; secondary phloem composed of ceratenchyma, phloem parenchyma, fibres and  
rays cells; ceratenchyma present in the form of thick-walled tangential strips between  
99two obliquely  running  rays; phloem fibres mostly in groups  arranged in concentric  
manner;  phloem  rays  mostly  multi  seriate,  fairly  large,  2  to  4  cells  wide,  a  few  
uniseriate  rays  also  occur;  micro  sphenoidal  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate  present  in  
phloem parenchyma and ray cells. 
Powder - Brown; fragments of thin-walled, rectangular cork cells; single or groups of  
lignifed, thick-walled, oval to polygonal stone cells upto 180 µ long and upto 90 µ wide, 
having clear striations with wide lumen and pits; fibres with small tapering and pointed  
ends; pieces of phloem parenchyma cells and a few microsphenoidal crystals of calcium  
oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     12.5 per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     25   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Glacial  
Acetic acid : Water (4: 1 :5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent spots at Rf.  
0.48 and 0.81 (both blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour four spots appear at Rf. 0.36,  
0.48,  0.60  and  0.81  (all  yellow).  On  spraying  with  5%  Methanolic-Sulphuric  acid  
reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes six spots appear at Rf. 0.16, 0.36,  
0.54, 0.64, 0.81 and 0.89 (all black).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Gum and a bitter substance. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, Vi¿ada  
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana,  H¤dya,  Raktad°Àahara,  ViÀaghna,  Trid°Àahara,  T¤Àaghna,  
R¡s¡yana, Adhodagadosahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Am¤t¡riÀ¶a, Danty¡dyariÀ¶a, Da¿am£lariÀ¶a, Induk¡n¶a  
Gh¤ta 
 
100THERAPEUTIC USES   - Ar°caka, Ëdhm¡na, Hikka, Sv¡¿a, Vrana, Svayathu, Sanip¡ta,  
Vami, Dagdhavra¸a, M£tr¡gh¡ta, áotha. 
DOSE  - 3-6 gm in powder form.10-30 gm for decoction in dividing dose.  
   
  
10141. Pattanga (Ht.Wd.)  
PAÙÙA×GA (Heart Wood) 
Pa¶¶a´ga  consists  of  dried  heart  wood  of  Caesalpinia  sappan  Linn.  (Fam. 
Caesalpiniaceae), a shrub or small tree, about 6 to 9 m in height, found in South India and  
Bengal; usually cultivated as a hedge plant. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Patr¡´ga, Pa¶¶a´ga 
Assamese:Baggam, Bakam 
Bengali:Bokom 
English:Sappan Wood 
Gujrati  :Patang 
Hindi    :Pagang, Bakam 
Kannada:Patang 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Patang 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Anaikuntrumani 
Telugu  :Bukkapuchettu 
Urdu    :Pattang 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in pieces, moderately hard, about 2.5 cm thick, smooth, dark brown  
on one surface and creamish-white on the other, and yellowish-orange in between;  
fracture, fibrous; odour and taste not characteristic.
b) Microscopic 
Shows vessels, tracheids, fibres and xylem parenchyma, traversed by numerous  
xylem rays; vessels numerous, barrel-shaped with bordered pits, scattered throughout  
xylem in single or in groups of 2 to 5, a few vessels filled with yellowish pigment; fibres  
spindle-shaped, pointed at both ends; xylem rays numerous uni to biseriate found more  
common, 3 to 30 cells high, ray cells round or oval; calcium oxalate crystals and starch  
grains absent. 
Powder - Creamish-white; shows group of fibres and vessels; crystals of calcium  
oxalate and starch grains absent. 
102Identification 
a) Colour test - i) 5 gram of sample extracted in 100 ml of water, filtered and seen in .  
daylight is saffron in colour; ii) 5 gram of sample extracted in 100 ml of 95% of alcohol,  
filtered and seen in daylight is reddish, which becomes carmine on addition of 5%  
aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide; iii) small fragments of wood impart crimson  
colour in lime water. 
b) Fluorescence - Extract obtained in the test for water soluble extractive greenish brown  
under U.V. light (254 nm) and brownish-green under (366 nm); extract obtained in the  
test for alcoholic soluble extractive greenish yellow under U.V. light (254 nm) and dark-
brown, under (366 nm). 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.2  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using n-Butanol : Acetic acid: Water  
(4:1:5) shows in visible light three spots at Rf. 0.75 (pink), 0.89 (grey), and 0.94 (dirty  
yellow). Under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.66 (blue), 0.75  
(pink), 0.89 (grey) and 0.94 (dirty yellow). On exposure to Iodine vapour four spots  
appear at Rf. 0.66, 0.75, 0.89 and 0.94 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-
Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at 110 °C four spots 
appear at Rf. 0.66. 0.75 (both light pink), 0.89 (grey) and 0.94 (orange). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Brasilin, Essential oils, Saponin Glycoside, Amino Acids and  
Sugars.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Pittahara, Var¸ya, D°Àahara  
 
103IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Karpuradyarka, Arimed¡di Taila, Ku´kum¡di Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - D¡ha, Mukharoga, Pradara, Vra¸a, Rakta D°Àa 
DOSE  - 5-10 gm.  
   
  
10442. Pippali (Ft.)  
PIPPALI (Fruit) 
Pippali consists of the dried, immature, catkin-like fruits with bracts of  Piper 
longum Linn. (Fam. Piperaceae), a slender, aromatic climber with perennial woody roots,  
occurring in hotter parts of India from central Himalayas to Assam upto lower hills of  
West Bengal and ever green forests of Western ghats as wild, and also cultivated in North  
East and many parts of the South. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Ka¸a, M¡gadhi, Magadha, K¤À¸a, áau¸·i 
Assamese:Pippali 
Bengali:Pipul 
English:Long Pepper 
Gujrati  :Lindi Peeper, Pipali 
Hindi    :Pipar 
Kannada:Hippali 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Pippali 
Marathi:Pimpali, Lendi Pimpali 
Oriya   :Pipali, Pippali 
Punjabi:Magh, Magh Pipali 
Tamil   :Arisi Tippali, Thippili 
Telugu  :Pippalu 
Urdu    :Filfil Daraz 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit greenish-black to black, cylindrical, 2.5 to 5 cm long and 0.4 to 1 cm thick,  
consisting  of  minute  sessile  fruits,  arranged  around  an  axis;  surface  rough  and  
composite; broken surface shows a central axis and 6 to 12 fruitlets arranged around an  
axis; taste, pungent producing numbness on the tongue; odour, aromatic. 
b) Microscopic 
Catkin shows 6 to 12 fruits, arranged in circle on a central axis, each having an  
outer epidermal layer of irregular cells filled with deep brown content and covered  
externally with a thick cuticle; mesocarp consists of larger cells, usually collapsed,  
irregular in shape and thin-walled; a number of stone cells in singles or in groups  
present; endocarp and seed coat fused to form a deep zone, outer layer of this zone  
composed of thin-walled cells and colourless, inner layer composed of tangentially  
105elongated  cells, having  reddish-brown content;  most  of  endocarp filled with starch  
grains, round to oval measuring 3 to 8 µ in dia.
Powder  - Deep moss green, shows fragments of parenchyma, oval to elongated stone  
cells, oil globules and round to oval, starch grains, measuring 3 to 8 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     7   per cent, Appendix     2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T. L. C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene:  
Ethylacetate (90: 10) as mobile phase. Under U.V. (366 nm) six fluorescent zones are  
visible at Rf. 0.15, 0.26, 0.34, 0.39, 0.50 and 0.80. On exposure to Iodine vapour seven  
spots appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.15, 0.26, 0.34, 0.39, 0.50 and 0.93 (all yellow). On spraying  
with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes five  
spots appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.22, 0.35, 0.43 and 0.82. On spraying with Dragendorff reagent  
three spots appear at Rf. 0.15, 0.26 and 0.34 (all orange). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential Oil and Alkaloids
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :Anusna 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :D¢pana,  H¤dya,  Kaphahara,  Rucya,  TridoÀahara,  V¡tahara,  V¤Àya,  
R¡sayana, R®cana 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Am¤t¡riÀ¶a,  Ayask¤ti,  Cyavanapr¡¿a  Aval®ha,  
Gu·apippali, A¿vagandh¡dyariÀ¶a, Kum¡ryasava,  
Candan¡sava, áiva Gu¶ika, Kai¿ora Guggulu 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - á£la, ArÀa, Gulma, Hikka, K¡sa, K¤mi, KÀaya, KuÀ¶ha, Pl¢ha  
Roga, Pram®ha, Sv¡¿a, T¤¿¸a, Udara Roga, Ëma V¡ta, Ëmad°Àa, Jvara 
DOSE  - 1-3 gm.  
10643. Plaksha ( Ft.)  
PLAKâA (Fruit) 
PlakÀa consists of dried fruit of Ficus lacor Buch. -Ham. Syn. F. lucescens Blume., 
F. infectoria Roxb. (Fam. Moraceae), a large spreading tree, with a few occasional aerial  
roots,  found  nearly  throughout  the  country  and  commonly  planted  as  an  avenue  and  
ornamental tree
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:J¡ti 
Assamese:Pakar 
Bengali:Pakar 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Peep, Pakadee 
Hindi    :Pakhar, Pilkhin 
Kannada:Karibasari, Kadubasari, Jeevibsari Basa 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Itthy, Kallal 
Marathi:Pimpari, Paicta 
Oriya   :Pakali, Pakal 
Punjabi:Pilkhan 
Tamil   :Kallal, Itthi 
Telugu  :Juvvi, Erra-Juvvi 
Urdu    :Pakhar 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit  a  syconus,  0.5  to  1.0  cm  in  dia.,  attached  with  pedicel;  sub-globose,  
wrinkled, glabrous, having three basal bracts; greyish-brown to yellowish-brown; taste,  
astringent. 
b) Microscopic 
Fruit shows single layered, thin-walled epidermis followed by a narrow zone of 2  
to 5 layers, of round, oval, rectangular, lignified stone cells with wide lumen; rest of  
mesocarp very wide consisting of oval to polygonal, collenchymatous cells containing  
brownish  contents;  a  few  vascular  traces  found  scattered  in  this  zone;  inner  zone  
consisting of stone cells similar in shape and size to those found scattered in outer zone;  
male and female flower attached to inner layer of mesocarp. 
Powder -Dark greyish-brown; shows fragments of epidermal cells; single, or groups of  
lignified stone cells; collenchymatous cells; a few debris of male and female flowers  
present. 
107IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   9    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica Gel 'G' using n-Butanol : Acetic Acid :  
Water (4: 1 :5) shows in visible light three spots at Rf. 0.27, 0.63 (both grey) and 0.97  
(yellowish green). Under U.V. (366 nm) six fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.53,  
0.63, 0.84, 0.91, 0.94 (all blue) and 0.97 (pink). On exposure to Iodine vapour twelve  
spots appear at Rf. 0.12, 0.16, 0.22, 0.27, 0.38, 0.50, 0.63, 0.73, 0.84, 0.91, 0.94 and 0.97  
(all yellow). On spraying with Ninhydrin reagent a single spot appears at Rf. 0.97 (brick  
red). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Amino Acids. 
 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :á¢ta 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  (No Formulations)
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - á°tha, árama, Bhrama, D¡ha, Murccha, Raktapitta, Pralapa 
DOSE  - 5-10 gm.  
   
  
10844. Priyala (St.Bk.)  
PRIYËLA (Stem Bark) 
Priy¡la consists of dried stem bark of Buchanania lanzan Spreng. Syn. B. latifolia 
Roxb. (Fam. Anacardiaceae), an evergreen tree upto 15 m high, found throughout the  
country in dry deciduous forests.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Priyala, Carah, Kharaskandhah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Chironji, Pial 
English:Calumpang Nut Tree 
Gujrati  :Chaaroli 
Hindi    :Chiraunji, Piyaar, Chironji 
Kannada:Kolatmavu, Chalaali 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Priyaalam, Mural maram 
Marathi:Chaaroli Jhaada 
Oriya   :Char, Charakoli, Priyal 
Punjabi:Chironji 
Tamil   :Saarapparuppu 
Telugu  :Sarapappu Chettu, Chinna morilli Mori, Saara 
Urdu    :Habb-us-Samena 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark occurs in 3 to 11 cm long, and about 1.0 cm thick pieces; external surface  
greyish-brown, rough due to formation of fissures; internal surface reddish-brown and  
fibrous; recurved, flat or more or less channelled; fracture, fibrous. 
b) Microscopic 
Shows a wide zone of rhytidoma, consisting of oval thick-walled cork cells,  
hardened dead cortical cells, having a few oil globules, groups of lignified phloem  
fibres, stone  cells and a large number  of  lysigenous  cavities with yellow contents;  
secondary phloem a wide zone composed of oval to polygonal, parenchymatous cells  
containing prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and a few oil globules; groups of round  
to oval stone cells having distinct striations with both narrow and wide lumen; phloem  
rays usually biseriate, composed of round to oval, slightly thick-walled cells. 
Powder -Greyish-brown; shows fragments of parenchymatous cells, phloem fibres, stone  
cells and a few prismatic crystals and oil globules.
109IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   18   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol ; Acetic acid  
Water (4:1:5) shows in visible light two spots at Rf. 0.14 and 0.91 (both grey). Under  
U.V.  (366nm)  two  fluorescent  zones  appear  at  Rf.  0.70  and  0.78  (both  blue).  On  
exposure to Iodine vapour two spots appear at Rf. 0.14 and 0.91 (both yellow). On  
spraying with Ferric chloride solution two spots appear at Rf. 0.14 and 0.91 (both dirty  
blue). 
 CONSTITUENTS   - Alkaloids, Tannins, Saponins, reducing Sugars, Triterpenoids and  
Flavonoids
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Sara, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :H¤dya,  Pittahara,  V¡tahara,  V¤¿ya,  D¡hahara,  Raktaprasadana,  
Virecanopaga 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - A¿°ka Gh¤ta, Nyagr°·h¡di Kv¡tha Curna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Jvara, Raktapitta, T¤Àa, Rak¡tis¡ra 
DOSE  - 5-10 gm. 
   
  
11045. Priyangu (Fruit.)  
PRIYA×GU (Fruit) 
Priya´gu  consists  of  dried  fruit  of  Callicarpa  macrophylla  Vahl. 
(Fam.Verbenaceae), a stout shrub, about 1.2 to 1.8 m high, occurring in the sub-Himalayan  
tracts from Hazara eastwards to Assam upto 1800 m. and in Upper Gangetic and West  
Bengal plains; 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Phalini, Vanita 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Priyangu 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Ghaunla, Priyango 
Hindi    :Priyangu 
Kannada:Kadu-edi, Sannanathdagida, Proyangu, Navane 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Nazhal, Kadurohini, Njazhal, Jnazhal 
Marathi:Gauhala, Gahula, Priyangu 
Oriya   :Priyangu 
Punjabi:Priyangu 
Tamil   :Gnazalpoo 
Telugu  :Prenkhanamu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit globose, 1 to 3 mm in dia., yellowish-brown with or without fruit stalk; 4-
toothed, bell-shaped calyx sometimes attached; fruit contains four one seeded pyrenes;  
taste, astringent; no characteristic odour. 
b) Microscopic 
Fruit shows pericarp differentiated into an epicarp, a mesocarp and an endocarp;  
epicarp thin, forms skin of fruit consisting of outer epidermal cells; a few epidermal  
cells elongate to form short stalked, disc-shaped, 2 to 4 celled glandular hairs; some  
other epidermal cells form stellate hairs; mesocarp composed of 5 to 8 layered, thin-
walled, parenchymatous cells; endocarp hard and stony, consisting of sclerenchymatous  
cells, which are larger towards inner side and smaller towards outer side; seeds four in  
each fruit; yellowish coloured; endosperm 2 to 6 layered consisting of isodiametric cells;  
cotyledons 2, consisting of isodiametric cells.
111Powder - Brown; shows fragments of straight walled, lignified cells of seed coat; oval to  
elongated, elliptical endocarp cells in surface view; single and groups of elongated, oval  
to  rectangular,  lignified  stone  cells  having  concentric  striations,  radial  canal,  with  
narrow lumen; a few glandular and stellate hairs and pieces of polygonal endosperm  
cells. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic  
acid: Water (4:1:5) shows under U.V. light (366 nm) one conspicuous fluorescent spot at  
Rf. 0.82 (sky blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour two spots appear at Rf. 0.82 & 0.92  
(both yellowish brown). On spraying with Ferric Chloride (10% aqueous solution) two  
spots appear at Rf. 0.82 & 0.92 (both greyish brown). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :á¢ta, Guru, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, Sangr¡hi, Balak¤ta, Udrikta Raktapras¡dana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - J¢rak¡di M°daka, B¤hatphala Gh¤ta, B¤hatcch¡gal¡dya  
Gh¤ta, Vy¡ghri Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Chardi, D¡ha, Jvara, Raktad°Àa, Brahma, V¡taroga, Vaktraj¡dya 
DOSE  - 1-2 gm. of the durg in powder form.  
   
  
11246. Prishnaiparni (W.P.)  
PÎáNIPARÛI(Whole Plant) 
P¤¿nipar¸i  consists of dried whole plant of Uraria picta Desv. (Fam. Fabaceae), an  
erect, under shrub upto 90 cm high, distributed throughout the country.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Citrapar¸i, Kalasi, Dhavani, P¤thakpar¸i, Shrigalavinna 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Salpani, Chhalani, Chakule 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Pithavan 
Hindi    :Pithavan, Dabra 
Kannada:Murele Honne, Ondele honne, Prushniparni 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Orila 
Marathi:Pithvan, Prushnipamee 
Oriya   :Prushnipamee, Shankarjata 
Punjabi:Detedarnee 
Tamil   :Oripai 
Telugu  :Kolakuponna 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root -  Occur in pieces of varying size, thickness of 1 to 2 cm, gradually tapering,  
tough,woody, cylindrical; externally light yellow to buff, internally pale yellow; surface  
bearing fine longitudinal striations; fracture, splintery or fibrous; taste, slightly acrid.
Stem - About 8.0 to 16.0 cm long, 0.2 to 0.4 cm in diameter, in cut pieces; cylindrical,  
branched,  pubescent,  external  surface  light  yellow  to  brown;  transversely  cut  and  
smoothened surface shows buff-white colour, mature stem longitudinally wrinkled, leaf  
scar present at nodes; fracture, fibrous. 
Leaf - Very variable, imparipinnate, upto 20 cm or more long, upto 2 cm wide; leaflets  
on the upper  part of  the stem  5  to  7, rigidly  sub-coriaceous, linear-oblong,  acute,  
blotched with white; glabrous above, finely reticulately veined and minutely pubescent  
beneath, base rounded; leaflets on the lower part of the stem 1 to 3, sub-orbicular or  
oblong.
113b) Microscopic 
Root - Shows 5 or 6 layers of thin-walled, tabular, regularly arranged cork cells; cork  
cambium  single  layered;  secondary  cortex  composed  of  4  to  6  layers  of  oval,  
tangentially arranged, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, a few fibres present singly or  
in  groups;  secondary  phloem  composed  of  sieve  elements,  parenchyma  and  fibres  
traversed by phloem rays; sieve elements somewhat collapsed towards periphery but  
intact in inner phloem region; phloem parenchyma composed of rounded to somewhat  
oval cells, larger towards periphery; fibres thick-walled, lignified with narrow lumen  
and tapering ends;phloem rays 1 to 5 cells wide, their cells being oval or rectangular in  
the portion nearer the wood but broader towards their distal ends; secondary xylem  
composed of vessels, tracheids, fibres, crystal fibres and parenchyma traversed by xylem  
rays; vessel very few, mostly confined to inner and outer part of xylem; fibres similar to  
those of phloem fibres and arranged in close set concentric bands; in isolated preparation  
vessels are cylindrical, pitted with transverse to oblique perforation; tracheids possess  
bordered pits; xylem parenchyma mostly rectangular with simple pits; xylem ray cells  
isodiametric showing simple pits; starch grains simple, round to oval, measuring 6 to  
17µ in dia., distributed throughout parenchymatous cells of secondary cortex, phloem  
and xylem; prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate present in crystal fibres, as well as in  
many parenchymatous cells of secondary cortex, phloem and ray cells.
Stern  - Shows single layered epidermis covered with cuticle, a few epidermal cells  
elongate outwards forming papillae; cortex 8 to 10 cells wide, consisting of oval to  
circular, thin walled, parenchymatous cells; groups of pericyclic fibres present in the  
form of discontinuous ring; phloem consisting of usual elements except phloem fibres;  
phloem rays 2 to 4 cells wide; xylem consisting of usual elements; vessels mostly simple  
pitted; fibres simple with blunt tips; xylem rays 1 to 4 cells wide and 2 to 8 cells in  
height; pith wide, consisting of thin-walled, round to oval parenchymatous cells. 
Leaf-
Midrib - single layered epidermis on either surfaces covered with striated cuticle having  
a few unicellular or bicellular, hooked or straight and pointed tipped hairs present on  
bothsurfaces but more on lower surface; collenchyma 2 or 3 layered, followed by 2  
layers  of  parenchyma  cells;  single  row  of  pericyclic  fibers  present  on  both  sides;  
vascular bundle located centrally.
Lamina  -  shows  single  layered  epidermis  on  either  surfaces,  a  few  unicellular  or  
bicellular, hooked or straight, pointed tipped hairs present on lower surface; mesophyll  
differentiated into single layered palisade and spongy parenchyma; spongy parenchyma  
cells oval to rounded having small intercellular spaces; numerous paracytic stomata  
present on lower surface; stomatal index 27 to 36 on lower surface; palisade ratio 4 or 5;  
vein-islet number 29 to 32 per sq. mm.; vascular bundle present centrally.
114Powder - Greenish-yellow; shows simple pitted vessels; fragments of fibres, tracheids,  
parenchyma cells; pieces of hairs; palisade cells; a few prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate; epidermal cells wavy walled in surface view showing paracyic stomata and  
starch grains simple, round to oval, measuring 6 to 17 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethyl acetate  
(9:1) shows under U.V. (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.13 (Red), 0.26 (light  
blue) and 0.30 (Red). On exposure to Iodine vapour nine spots appear at Rf. 0.07, 0.18,  
0.26,  0.30,  0.44,  0.63,  0.86,  0.91  and  0.97  (all  yellow).  On  spraying  with  5%  
Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes eight  
spots appear at Rf. 0.18, 0.26, 0.30, 0.39, 0.44, 0.86, 0.91 and 0.97 (all grey). 
CONSTITUENTS  -   
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :D¢pana,  Sa´gr¡hi,  Trid°Àahara,  V¡tahara,  V¤Àya,  S°thahara,  A
´gamardapra¿amana, Sandh¡n¢ya, J¢v¡¸u N¡¿aka, Balavardhaka 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Am¤t¡riÀ¶a,  Angamarda  Pra¿amana  Ka¿aya  C£r¸a,  
Da¿am£la Taila, Vy¡ghritaila, Madhyama N¡rayana  
Taila, áiraha á£l¡di Vajra Rasa, Da¿am£l¡riÀa. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - Atis¡ra, Chardi,  D¡ha, Jvara, K¡sa, Rakt¡tis¡ra, Raktavik¡ra,  
Sv¡¿a,  Unm¡da,  V¡tarakta,  Vra¸a,  V¡tar°ga,  Raktar¿a,  
Kaphajamad¡tyaya  T¤Àna,  Nataprabala,  Ók¡hika  Jvara,  Pilla  
(N®tra R°ga) Asthibhagna 
DOSE  - 20-50 gm powder for decoction.  
11547. Pushkara (Rt.)  
PUâKARA (Root) 
PuÀkara  consists of dried root of  Inula racemosa  Hook. f. (Fam. Asteraceae), a  
stout herb, 0.5 to 1.5 m high, mostly found in Western Himalayas upto 2600 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:K¡¿m¢ra, P°uÀkara 
Assamese:Pohakarmul, Puskar 
Bengali:Pushkara, Pushkaramula 
English:Orris Root 
Gujrati  :Pushkarmula 
Hindi    :Pohakar Mul 
Kannada:Pushkara Moola 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Puskara 
Marathi:Pokhar Mool 
Oriya   :Puskara 
Punjabi:Pokhar Mool 
Tamil   :Pushkarmulam 
Telugu  :Pushkara Mulamu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root available in cut pieces, upto about 15 cm long and 0.5 to 2.0 cm in dia.;  
cylindrical, straight or somewhat curved; surface rough due to longitudinal striations  
and cracks, scars of lateral rootlets and rhytidoma present, externally brownish-grey and  
internally  yellowish-brown;  fracture,  short  and  smooth;  odour,  camphoraceous  and  
aromatic; taste, bitter and camphoraceous.
b) Microscopic 
Mature  root  shows  a  wavy  outline  due  to  development  of  rhytidoma;  cork  
composed of 8 to 12 layers of thick-walled, tangentially elongated, rectangular cells,  
some filled with reddish-brown contents; secondary cortex 1 or 2 layers or absent;  
secondary phloem consists of sieve elements and parenchyma having secretory cavities  
and traversed by medullary rays; cambium not distinct; wood occupies bulk of root  
consisting of vessels, tracheids, fibres, parenchyma, secretory cavities and medullary  
rays; vessel have reticulate thickenings, a few fibres occur in small patches adjacent to  
vessels  and  abundant  in  xylem  parenchyma,  thin-walled;  a  few  small  tracheids;  
parenchyma in general contain granular, slightly yellowish or colourless inulin granules  
116and also a few yellowish oil globules; starch grains either absent or very rarely seen in  
cortical and ray cells; yellowish resinous masses present in secretory canals. 
Powder - Reddish-brown; under microscope shows fragments of cork cells, vessels,  
fibres and parenchyma cells containing tannin and inulin. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.6  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Benzene: Ethylacetate  
(9:1) shows on exposure to Iodine vapour nine spots at Rf. 0.23, 0.28, 0.34, 0.39, 0.48,  
0.51, 0.64, 0.73 and 0.94 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent  
and heating the plate for about ten minutes at 105o C eight spots appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.28,  
0.34, 0.39, 0.48, 0.64, 0.73 and 0.94 (all violet). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential oil
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphav¡tajit 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - K¡nk¡yana Gu¶ika, Kum¡ryasava, Mahan¡raya¸a Taila,  
Manasamitravaaka, Da¿am£l¡riÀta, L°dr¡sava, R¡sn¡di  
Kv¡tha C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Aruci, Ëdhm¡na, Hikka, Jvara, K¡sa, Sv¡sa, P¡rsva¿ula, á°pha,  
Ërdita, Pan·u 
DOSE  - 1-3 gm of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
11748. Rudraksha (Sd.)  
RUDRËKâA (Seed) 
Rudr¡kÀa consists of seeds of Elaeocarpus sphaericus Gaertn. K. Schum (Fam. 
Elaeocarpaceae), a medium sized, ornamental tree, found in the lower Himalayas and in  
the Western ghats at higher elevation. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Chattu Sampangi 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Rudrakya 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Rudraksh, Rudraksha 
Hindi    :Rudraki 
Kannada:Rudrakshi mara, Rudraksh 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Rudraksha 
Marathi:Rudraksha 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Rudraksha 
Tamil   :Rudraksha 
Telugu  :Rudraksha 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seed stony, very hard, spherical, obovoid or oval, variable in size, about 1 or 2  
cm in dia.; longitudinally grooved, tubercled, brown, divided into five segments. 
b) Microscopic 
Seed coat consists of multilayered, oval to polygonal stone cells and internally  
followed  by  8  to  10  layers  of  tangentially  elongated,  oval-shaped,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells, filled with reddish-brown contents, excepting the middle 2 or 3  
layers; endosperm  consists  of oval to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells;  
rosette crystals  of  calcium  oxalate and oil  globules  present  in  this region;  embryo  
slightly curved and consists of oval to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, a  
few having oil globules. 
Powder - Reddish-brown; shows polygonal lignified with narrow lumened stone cells,  
thin-walled, parenchymatous cells with reddish-brown contents, rosette crystals of  
calcium oxalate and oil globules.
118IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                                                     Nil   Appendix    2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   1.2  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.4  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     1    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using n-Butanol : Acetic acid :  
Water (4:1 :5) under U.V. (366 nm) shows one fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.91 (violet). On  
exposure to Iodine vapour three spots appear at Rf. 0.19, 0.31 and 0.52 (all yellow). On  
spraying with 5% Methnaolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for 
ten minutes a single spot appears at Rf. 0.91(grey). 
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil and Fatty Acids. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Snigdha, Sth£la 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :-- 
Karma :M®dhya, RakÀoghna, Ar°gyaprada, H¤dyam (Saumanasya Karah) 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  G°r°can¡di  Va¶i,  Cukkumtippaly¡di  Gu¶ika,  
Dhanvantara  Gu¶ika,  Svaramuk¡di  Gu¶ika,  M
¤tasanj¢vani Gu¶ika 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  Matisudhikara,  Uccharaktac¡pa,  Prgy¡par¡dha,  H¤dyar°ga,  
Rom¡ntika, M¡nasar°ga, Anidra 
DOSE  - 1-2 gm internally. 
   
  
11949. Saraja (Exud.)  
SARJA (Exudate)  
Sarja consists of resinous exudate of Vateria indica Linn. (Fam. Dipterocarpaceae),  
a large, evergreen tree, upto 30 m high with a cylindrical bole, indigenous to the evergreen  
forests of the Western Ghats from North Kanara to Kerala and also extensively planted as  
an avenue tree in Karnataka; resinous exudate is obtained by making semicircular incisions  
on the stem through the cork cambium up to the surface of sapwood.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:D®vdh£pa, K¡r¿ya, Sasyasumbara, Ajakar¸a 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Shakgachha, Chandras 
English:White Damar tree, India Cop tree 
Gujrati  :Chandras 
Hindi    :Sandras, Safed Damar 
Kannada:Rala 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Payin 
Marathi:Raal 
Oriya   :Sava 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Kungiliyam, Vellai Kuntarakam, Vellai Kundarakam 
Telugu  :Tellaguggilarnu, Telladamaramu 
Urdu    :Sandaras, Raal 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Rough, irregular, solid, brittle masses, breaking into angular pieces, upto 1.5 cm  
thick, light-yellow to pale yellow in colour; odour fragrant; tasteless. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Slightly  soluble  in  alcohol  in  which  it  forms  ajelly-like  mass;  insoluble  in  
petroleum ether (40 °C-60°C), forming white precipitate; insoluble in carbon-disulphide  
but  yields  jelly-like  mass,  dissolves  entirely  and  gives  a  dense  red  colour  with  
concentrated  sulphuric  acid;  dissolves  mostly  in  chloroform  giving  white  or  milky  
solution; (Sal resin dissolves almost entirely in petroleum ether forming a pale cream  
solution and also dissolves entirely in carbon-disulphide). 
120Test for presence of Colophony - (Distinction from Sala and Shallaki resin) 
1. Dissolve 0.1 g in 10 ml of acetic anhydride by gentle heat, cool, and add I drop of  
sulphuric acid; a bright purplish-red colour, rapidly changing to violet, is produced.
2. Shake 0.1 g of powder with 10 ml of light petroleum (b.p. 50 °-60°), and filter; shake 5  
ml of the filtrate with 10 ml of dilute solution of copper acetate; the petroleum layer  
assumes a bright bluish-green colour.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                                                     Nil  Appendix     2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   0.1  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Negligible                                    
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than      60  per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using Benzene: Methanol (95:5)  
shows under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent spots at Rf. 0.04, 0.28 and 0.93 (all blue).  
On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.28, 0.48, 0.65, 0.76, 0.85  
and 0.93 (all yellow). On spraying with Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating  
the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C seven spots appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.28, 0.48, 0.65, 0.76,  
0.85 and 0.93 (all violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Resins. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Snigdha, UÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphaghna, V¡tahara, Var¸ya, ViÀaghna, K¤mighna, Sv®dahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Kacchur¡di Cur¸a L®pa, Pi¸da Taila, Lavang¡di C£rna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Atis¡ra, Graha¸i, K¤mi R°ga, Kan·u, KuÀ¶ha, Pram®ha, Rakta D
°Àa,  V¡ta  Rakta,  Vra¸a,  Y°ni  R°ga,  P¡¸du,  Karna  R°ga,  
B¡dhirya,  Visph°a,  M®d°roga,  K¿udrar°ga,  Lippa,  M¡nasa  
Roga, MuÀika ViÀa, Vidradhi, Dagdhaka 
DOSE  - 1-2 gm Internal, External.  
12150. Satavari (Rt.)  
áATËVARI (Root) 
át¡vari  consists of tuberous roots of Asparagus recemosus Willd. (Fam. Liliaceae),  
an ascending, spinous much branched, perennial climber found throughout the country. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:N¡r¡ya¸i, V¡ri, Abh¢ru, Atirasa 
Assamese:Satmull 
Bengali:Satamuli, Satmuli, Shatamuli 
English:Asparagus 
Gujrati  :Satavari 
Hindi    :Satavar, Satamul 
Kannada:Ashadi poeru, Halavu Bau, Narayani, Makkala 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Satavari Kizhangu 
Marathi:Shatavari 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Satavar 
Tamil   :Shimai-Shadvari, Nilichedi Kishangu 
Telugu  :Sima-Shatawari (Dry Root), Pippipichara, Pilliteegalu (Fresh Root) 
Urdu    :Satawari 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root tuberous, 10 to 30 cm in length and 0.1 to 0.5 cm thick, tapering at both  
ends with longitudinal wrinkles; colour cream; taste, sweetish.
b) Microscopic 
Shows an outer layer of piliferous cells, ruptured at places, composed of small,  
thin-walled,  rectangular  asymetrical  cells,  a  number  of  cells  elongated  to  form  
unicellular root hairs; cortex comprises of 25 to 29 layers, distinct in two zones, outer  
and inner cortex; outer cortex consists of 6 or 7 layers, compactly arranged, irregular to  
polygonal, thick walled, lignified cells; inner cortex comprise of 21 to 23 layers, oval to  
polygonal, thin-walled, tangentially elongated cells with intercellular spaces; stone cells,  
either singly or in groups, form a discontinuous to continuous ring in the upper part of  
this region; raphides of calcium oxalate also present in this region; 2 or 3 layers of stone  
cells  encirle  the  endodermis;  endodermis  composed  of  thin-walled  parenchymatous  
cells; pericycle present below endodermis; stele ex arch and radial in position; xylem  
consist of vessels, tracheids and parenchyma; xylem vessels have pitted thickening;  
phloem  patches  consists  of  usual  element;  pith  composed  of  circular  to  oval  
parenchymatous cells, a few cells slightly lignified. 
122Powder  -  Yellowish-cream;  fragments  of  lignified,  thick-walled  cells;  vessels  with  
simple pits, pieces of raphides, numerous, lignified, rectangular elongated' stone cells  
having clear striations with wide as well as narrow lumen and groups of parenchyma. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     45   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol : Acetic acid:  
Water (4:1:5) v/v shows on exposure to Iodine vapour three spots at Rf. 0.07, 0.50 and  
0.67 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% methanolic sulphuric acid reagent and heating  
the plate for ten minutes at 110 °C four spots appear at Rf. 0.07 (black), 0.41 (grey), 0.50  
and 0.83 (both brownish yellow). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sugar, Glycosides, Saponin and Sitosterol. 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :áukrala, Balya, H¤dya, M®dhya, Pittahara, Rasayana, V¤Àya, áukraja,  
Kaphav¡taghna, V¡taharaa, Stanyakara, N®trya, AgnipuÀtikara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Brahma Ras¡yana, Mahan¡raya¸a Taila, âat¡vari Gu·a,  
P£ga  Khan·a,  Saubh¡gya¿u¸hi,  B¤hacch¡galy¡di  Gh
¤ta, áat¡vari Gh¤ta, áat¡vari Kalpa, A¿vagandh¡riÀta,  
N¡rasimha C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Amlapitta, ArÀa, Atis¡ra, Gulma, KÀaya, Rakt¡t¢sara, Raktapitta,  
Raktavik¡ra,  V¡tarakta,  Visarpa,  á°ha,  Pari¸¡ma  á£la,  
Mutrarakta,  V¡tajvara,  Svarabh®da,  Nakt¡ndhya,  S£tika  Roga,  
Stanya D°Àa, Stanya KÀaya 
DOSE  - 3-6 gm of the drug. 
   
12351. Shigru (Rt.Bk.)  
áIGRU (Root Bark) 
áigru  consists  of  dried  root  bark  of  Moringa  oleifera  Lam.  Syn.  Moringa 
pterygosperma Gaertn. (Fam. Moringaceae), a small or medium sized tree, found wild in  
sub-Himalayan tract, and also commonly cultivated throughout the country for its leaves  
and fruits used as vegetable. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:á°bh¡µjana, Bahala, T¢kÀ¸agandha, AkÀiva, M°caka 
Assamese:Saijna, Sohjna 
Bengali:Sajina, Sajna 
English:Horse Radish Tree, Drum-stick Tree 
Gujrati  :Saragavo 
Hindi    :Sahajan 
Kannada:Neegge, Nugge Kand Chakke 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Muringa 
Marathi:Sevaga, Segat Sala 
Oriya   :Sajina 
Punjabi:Sohanjana 
Tamil   :Murungai 
Telugu  :Munaga, Mulaga 
Urdu    :Sohanjana, Sahajan 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occuts in pieces of variable sizes, external surface, light greyish-brown,  
rough, reticulated, marked with transverse row of lenticels; outer bark, thin, peeling off  
in small bits, internal surface, white. 
b) Microscopic 
Mature bark shows a very wide zone of cork, consisting of 25 or more rows of  
rectangular cells, arranged radially, a few inner layers, larger and cubicular in shape;  
secondary cortex composed of rectangular, thin-walled cells, a few containing starch  
grains and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate and a few others containing oil globules  
and  coloured  resinous  matter;  starch  grains  mostly  simple  and  rarely  compound,  
composed of 2 or 3 components, round to oval in shape, measuring 6 to 28 µ in dia., 
groups of stone cells, round to rectangular, of various sizes, present in secondary cortex;  
mucilagenous  cavities  found  scattered  towards  inner  secondary  cortical  region;  
secondary phloem appreciably wide, consisting mainly of phloem fibres and phloem  
124parenchyma;  phloem  fibres  in  large  patches,  alternating  with  phloem  parenchyma;  
numerous starch grains and cell contents as described above also present in phloem cells;  
phloem rays numerous, long, 2 to 4 seriate, consisting of radially elongated, thin-walled  
cells containing numerous starch grains, similar to those present in secondary cortex. 
Powder - Pinkish-brown; shows stone cells, phloem fibres, starch grains, measuring 6 to  
28 µ in dia., rosette crystals of calcium oxalate and oil globules. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   18   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     11   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using Toluene: Ethylacetate (9:1)  
shows under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.06 and 0.52 (both green). On  
exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.06, 0.33, 0.43, 0.54, 0.70, 0.78 and  
0.87 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric aeid reagent and heating the plate  
at 105°C for ten minutes six spots appear at Rf. 0.33, 0.43, 0.54, 0.70, 0.78 and 0.87 (all  
violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids and Essential Oil
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, Sara, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :CakÀusya, D¢pana, H¤dya, Kaphahara, M®d°hara, P¡cana, Pittakara,  
Samgr¡hi, V¡tahara, ViÀaghna, Sukrala, á°phaghna, R°cana 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Prabhaµjana  Vimardana  Taila,  S¡rasvata  Gh¤ta,  
Vastyamay¡naka  Gh¤ta,  Kasara  Taila,  Ma¸ikya  
Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - Vra¸a Vik¡ra, Gr¡¶hi, Gulma, Kar¸a¿£la, M®d°r°ga, Vidradhi,  
Visarpa, á°pha, K¤mir°ga, Pl¢ha R°ga, Galaga¸·a, Mukhaj¡dya,  
A¿mari, Mutra áarkara, Ku¿¶ha, KÀata, Antarvidradhi 
125DOSE  - 25-50 gm of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
12652. Shigru (Seed.)  
áIGRU (Seed) 
áigru consists of dried seed of  Moringa oleifera  Lam. Syn.  M.  pterygosperma 
Gaertn. (Fam. Moringaceae), a small or medium sized tree, found wild in sub-Himalayan  
tract, and also commonly cultivated all over the plains of the country, for its leaves and  
fruits used as vegetable. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:á°bh¡µjana, AkÀiva, M°caka 
Assamese:Saijna, Sohjna 
Bengali:Sajina, Sajna 
English:Drum-stick Tree, Horse Radish Tree 
Gujrati  :Sargavo, Sekato 
Hindi    :Sahajana, Munga, 
Kannada:Neegge, Nugge Beeta 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Muringa, Tiksnggandha 
Marathi:Shevaga, Shegatabeeja 
Oriya   :Sajana, Munga, Munika 
Punjabi:Sohaniana 
Tamil   :Muringai, Muringai Virai 
Telugu  :Munaga 
Urdu    :Sahajan, Sohanjana 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds hard, trigonous, having short wings; size 0.5 to 1.0 cm long and 0.3 to 0.5  
cm wide; colour greyish-cream; odour, not characteristic; taste; slightly bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Seed shows 10 to 15 layered, tangentially elongated, thin-walled cells of the  
testa, followed by a wide zone of cells of cotyledons consisting of round to oval, thin-
walled, parenchymatous cells with intercellular spaces and containing mucilage and oil  
globules. 
Powder- Cream coloured; shows groups of elongated, round to oval, parenchymatous  
cells; oval to elongated, thin-walled cells of testa showing striations in surface view and  
oil globules. 
127IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.8  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     24   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica Gel 'G' plate using Chloroforyn : Toluene  
(75:25) as mobile phase shows under U.V. (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.52,  
0.59 and 0.94 (all blue). On spraying with Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric acid reagent and  
heating the plate for about ten minutes at 110 °C three spots appear at Rf. 0.52, 0.59 and  
0.94 (all violet). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :CakÀusya, D¢pana, H¤dya, Kaphahara, Sangr¡hi, V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Sudar¿ana Cur¸a, á°thaghna L®pa, Sarsap¡di Pral®pa,  
Sarvajvarahara Lauha 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - á°tha,  Gulma,  K¤mir°ga,  M®d°r°ga,  Mukhaj¡dya,  Plihar°ga,  
V¡tar°ga, Vidradhi, Vra¸a, N®trar°ga, Apaci, Galaganda, áir°r
°ga, Atinidra 
DOSE  - 5-10 gm of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
12853. Shigru (St.Bk.)  
áIGRU (Stem Bark) 
áigru consists of dried stem bark of Moringa oleifera Lam. Syn. M. pterygosperma  
Gaertn.  (Fam.  Moringaceae),  a  small  or  medium  sized  tree,  indigenous  to  the  sub-
Himalayan tract, found wild in lower Himalayas and cultivated all over the plains of India,  
for its leaves and fruits used as vegetables.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:á°bh¡µjana, Bah°la, á¡khapatra 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Sajina, Sajne 
English:Horse Radish Tree, Drum-stick Tree, 
Gujrati  :Saragave 
Hindi    :Sahijana 
Kannada:Nugge, Nuggemara, Nuggekoyimara 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Muringya, Murinna 
Marathi:Shewga 
Oriya   :Munga, Munika, Sajana 
Punjabi:Sohajana 
Tamil   :Murungai 
Telugu  :Munaga chettu, Mulaya Chetta 
Urdu    :Sahajan, Sohanjana 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Mature bark, rough, deeply cracked, grey or dark green; young bark, greenish to  
greenish-brown, 1 to 3 cm thick or more, depending upon the age of plant; taste, bitter  
and pungent.
 
b) Microscopic 
Cork  region  very  wide,  composed  of  15  to  20  layers,  thin-walled,  radially  
arranged, rectangular cells with coloured contents; cork cambium consists of a single  
row of thin-walled, rectangular or tangentially elongated cells; secondary cortex very  
wide,  composed  of  nearly  cubical  to  rectangular,  thin-walled  parenchymatous  cells  
containing  a few rosette and  cubical,  rhomboidal  or  hexagonal  crystals  of  calcium  
oxalate; several groups of thick walled, lignified, elongated to polygonal stone cells with  
striations and wide as well as narrow lumen present; a few small, simple, round to oval,  
starch grains measuring 5 to 14 µ in dia., with concentric striations and hilum, and a few  
oil globules scattered in cortical region; secondary phloem consists of thin-walled, oval  
129to polygonal parenchyma, fibres, and phloem rays; phloem parenchyma cells adjoining  
the  sclerenchyma  cells  containing  small  rhomboidal  or  cubical  crystals  of  calcium  
oxalate and many large lysigenous mucilage cavities filled with mucilage; groups of  
lignified fibres form nearly concentric, discontinuous zones, separated by phloem rays;  
rays many, 2 or 3 seriate, occasionally uniseriate; towards the inner phloem regions they  
are radially elongated but, become tangentially elongated in the outer phloem; most of  
the cells loaded with simple, starch grains and crystals of calcium oxalate. 
Powder - Light brown, fragments of thin-walled, polygonal, sometimes rectangular cork  
cells; groups or single, thick-walled, lignified, elongated to polygonal stone cells with  
striations and lumen; a few rhomboidal, rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; a few oil  
globules; a very small, numerous, simple, oval to round, starch grains measuring 5 to 14  
µ in dia., with concentric striations and narrow hilum; pieces of phloem parenchyma,  
lignified phloem fibres and ray cells.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     1    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using Chloroform : Methanol (85:15)  
shows under U.V. (366nm) a fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.97 (blue). On exposure to Iodine  
vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.15, 0.22, 0.49, 0.81 and 0.97 (all yellow). On spraying  
with 5% Methanolic- Phosphomolybdic acid reagent six spots appear on heating the  
plate at 105°C for about fifteen minutes at Rf. 0.15, 0.22, 0.49, 0.66, 0.81 and 0.97 (all  
grey). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Sterols and Terpenes.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Picchila, RukÀa, Sara, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :á°phaghna, áukrala, CakÀusya, D¢pana, H¤dya, Kaphaghna, R°cana,  
Samgr¡hi,  ViÀaghna,  Vid¡hak¤t,  V¡taghna,  áirovir®canopaga,  Pitt
°tkl®¿aka 
130 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  S¡rasvata  Gh¤ta,  Vastyamay¡naka  Gh¤ta,  
K¡rp¡s¡sthy¡di  Taila,  KÀara  Taila,  ViÀati
´duka  Taila,  Kha´da  Lavana,  Sar¿ap¡di  
Pral®pa, Sv®ta Karav¢ra Pallavadya Ùaila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - AkÀir°ga, Apaci, Ar¿a, Bhagandara, Gulma, K¤mi, M®d°r°ga,  
Vidradhi, Pliha R°ga, H¤dya R°ga, Galaga´da, Vra¸a á°tha, D
¤sti Roga, Sarvap¢da Niv¡ra¸i 
DOSE  - Stem Bark juice 10-20 ml.Stem Bark Powder 2-5 gm. 
   
  
13154. Sringataka (Drd.Sd.)  
áR×GËÙAKA (Dried Seed) 
ár´g¡taka consists of dried seeds of  Trapa natans  Linn. var.  bispinosa  (Roxb.) 
Makino. Syn. T. bispinosa Roxb. T. quadrispinosa Wall. (Fam. Trapaceae), a very variable,  
rooted, aquatic herb occurring throughout the greater part of the country in lakes, tanks and  
ponds arid also extensively grown 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:ár´gata, Jalaphala, Trik°¸aphala 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Paniphal, Singade, Jalfal 
English:Water Chestnut 
Gujrati  :Shingoda, Singoda 
Hindi    :Singhara, Singhada 
Kannada:Singade, Gara, Simgara, Simgoda 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Karimpolam, Vankotta, Jalaphalam, Karimpola 
Marathi:Shingoda 
Oriya   :Paniphala, Singada 
Punjabi:Singhade, Gaunaree 
Tamil   :Singhara 
Telugu  :Kubyakam, Singada 
Urdu    :Singhara 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds somewhat triangular to 4-angled in shape, with or without shallow groove  
on both surfaces, 2 to 3.0 cm long and 2.5 to 3.5 cm wide; externally reddish-brown;  
mostly one surface mottled, smooth in texture.
b) Microscopic 
Shows testa of three zones, outer zone consisting of tangentially elongated or  
somewhat crushed, 3 to 6 layered parenchymatous cells, middle zone of lignified cells,  
inner zone of rectangular and tangentially elongated thin-walled cells having reddish  
brown contents; tegmen 2 or 3 layered, comprising of tangentially elongated cells, rest  
of the seed consisting of thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; starch grains simple, or in  
groups, oval to round having distinct striations and hilum, measuring 6 to 45 µ in dia, a 
few vascular strands with vessels showing spiral thickening, found scattered in this  
region. 
132Distinction from Arrow root (a possible substitute)- Arrow root (Maranta arundinacea  
Linn.) starch is more irregular in shape, being ellipsoid, pear-shaped or even almost  
trigonal,  occasionally  showing  small  tuberosities;  hilum  stellar  or  cleft,  slightly  
eccentric, being situated near the broader end; fine concentric striations are visible in  
most granules. 
Powder - White; numerous simple, solitary and groups of circular to oval starch grains,  
having concentric striations and distinct hilum in centre, measuring upto 45 µ in dia; a 
few fragments of testa consisting of oval to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchyma cells in  
surface view. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.3  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol :  
Acetic acid: Water (4:1:5) vlv shows under U.V. (366 nm) one fluorescent zone at Rf.  
0.60 (blue). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the  
plate for about ten minutes at Rf. 105 °C three spots appear at Rf. 0.30 (grey), 0.43  
(grey), and 0.93 (violet). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Starch and Protein. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :KaÀ¡ya, Madhura 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :áramahara,  áukrakara,  Garbhasth¡pana,  Gr¡hi,  Pittahara,  V¤Àya,  
Stanyajanana, Rakta Stambhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Am¤tapr¡¿a Gh¤ta, Saubh¡gya áu¸¶hi, Pugakha¸·a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - Asthibhagna, D¡ha, M£trak¤cchra, Pram®ha, Raktapitta, T¤Àa,  
Visarpa, Garbha Srava, áopha(external), V¡tavyadhi 
DOSE  - 5-10 mg of the drug in powder form. 
13355. Sruvavriksha (Lf. )  
SRUVAVÎKâA (Leaf) 
Sruvav¤kÀa consists of dried leaf of  Flacourtia indica  Merr. Syn.  F. ramontchi  L 
Herit. (Fam. Flacourtiaceae), a small deciduous, usually thorny tree or shrub, found in the  
sub-Himalayan tracts and outer Himalayas upto 1220 m and also common throughout  
Chota Nagpur, Deccan and South India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Vikankata, G°pakanta 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Bincha, Bainchi, Bewich 
English:Governors Plum, Madaraskara Plum 
Gujrati  :Kankata 
Hindi    :Bilangra 
Kannada:llumanika, Dodda Gejjalakai 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Vavankataku, Vikamkath, Yaliya Nzerinigal, Loloikka 
Marathi:Kaker 
Oriya   :Kantheikoli, Vaincha, Uincha 
Punjabi:Kakoa, Kukoya 
Tamil   :Sottaikala, Kat Ukala 
Telugu  :Putregu, Kanavegu Chettu, Vikankata 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaves simple, sessile, 3 to 5 cm long and 1 to 3 cm wide, ovate to obovate,  
glabrous above, more or less pubescent beneath, serrate towards apex, and crenate in  
basal region, greenish-grey. 
b) Microscopic 
Leaf-
Midrib - Epidermis, single layered, covered externally with thin cuticle; followed by 1 or  
2 layers of collenchyma and 3 to 5 layers parenchyma; lower epidermis with 2 or 3  
layers of adjacent collenchyma and 2 or 3 layers of parenchyma; vascular bundle single,  
situated in the centre, covered by fibre sheath on both sides; a few unicellular, hooked,  
trichomes present on lower surface; a few rosette and prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate scattered in parenchyma cells. 
134Lamina  - Epidermis single layered on both surfaces, covered with thin cuticle; a few  
simple, unicellular hairs with blunt tips present on lower surface; 2 layers of palisade  
cells and 2 or 3 layers of spongy parenchyma cells present; rosette and a few prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate present in epidermis, palisade and spongy parenchyma cells;  
a few veinlets present in between palisade and spongy parenchyma; stomata anisocytic,  
present on lower surface; palisade ratio 2 or 3; vein islet number 8 to 10 per sq. mm;  
veinlet termination number 10 to 12 per sq. mm; stomatal index 24 to 26. 
Powder  - Greenish-grey,  shows  fragments  of  collenchymatous,  and  parenchymatous  
cells; elongated, thick -walled pointed fibres; sinuous walled epidermal cells in surface  
view, containing rosette and a few prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; palisade cells, a  
few anisocytic stomata, and pieces of unicellular hairs present. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   9    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.6  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol :  
Acetic acid: Water (4:1:5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.26,  
0.76, 0.88 (all blue) and 0.98 (red). On exposure to Iodine vapour four spots appear at  
Rf. 0.26, 0.48, 0.61 and 0.88 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric  
acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 105 °C six spots appear at Rf. 0.34,  
0.48, 0.61, 0.76, 0.88 and 0.98 (all grey). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannin and Sugar.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :D¢pana, Kaphahara, Pittahara, P¡cana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Ëragvadh¡di Kv¡tha Cur¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - á°pha, K¡mala, Raktavik¡ra 
DOSE  - 50-100 gm for decoction. 
13556. Sruvavriksha (St.Bk.)  
SRUVAVÎKâA (Stem Bark) 
Sruvav¤kÀa  consists  of  dried  stem  bark  of  Flacourtia  indica  Merr.  Syn.  F. 
ramontchi L Herit. (Fam. Flacourtiaceae), a small deciduous, usually thorny tree or shrub,  
found in the sub-Himalayan tract and outer Himalayas upto 1220 m and also common  
throughout Indian deciduous forests. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:G°pakanta, Vikankata 
Assamese:Bainchi, Bewich, Bincha 
Bengali:Governors Plum, Madaraskara 
English:--- 
Gujrati  :Kankata 
Hindi    :Bilangra 
Kannada:llumanika, Dodda Gejjala Kai 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Vayankataku, Vikamkath, Yali Nzerinigal 
Marathi:Kaker 
Oriya   :Kantheikoli, Vaincha, Vinch 
Punjabi:Kakoa, Kukoya 
Tamil   :Kat Ukala, Sottaikala 
Telugu  :Kanavegu Chettu, Putregu, Vika 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in 2 to 5 cm long and 1 to 3 mm thick, curved, quilled or flat  
pieces; external surface smooth, reddish-grey, having lenticels, internal surface reddish-
brown; fracture, short. 
b) Microscopic 
Mature bark shows 4 to 13 layers of exfoliated cork consisting of tangentially  
elongated  and  radially  arranged,  thin-walled  cells,  a  few  containing  reddish-brown  
contents;  secondary  cortex  consisting  of  oval  to  elliptical,  tangentially  elongated,  
parenchymatous cells, followed by a zone of compactly arranged fibre and groups of  
stone cells; secondary phloem composed of sieve elements, parenchyma, phloem rays  
and phloem fibres; lignified phloem fibres oval to polygonal mostly in groups; phloem  
rays 1 or 2 cells wide and 3 to 10 cells deep, slightly thick-walled; prismatic crystals of  
calcium  oxalate  present  in  secondary  cortex  and  phloem  parenchyma;  starch grains  
simple, round to oval measuring 3 to 11 µ  in dia. 
136Powder - Crearnish-brown; shows cork cells, lignified phloem fibres, prismatic crystals  
of calcium oxalate, numerous, round to oval starch grains measuring 3 to 11 µ in dia, 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   16   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.6  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     11  per cent, Appendix     2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform : Methanol  
(9:1)  shows  under  U.V.  (366nm)  one  fluorescent  spot  at  Rf.  0.27  (Sky  blue).  On  
exposure  to  Iodine  vapour  four  spots  appear  at  Rf.  0.13,  0.20,  0.27  and  0.64  (all  
brownish yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating  
the plate for ten minutes at 105 °C five spots appear at Rf. 0.06, 0.13, 0.20, 0.27 and 0.64  
(all greyish brown). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannin and Flacourtin, a phenolic glucoside ester. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphahara, Pittahara, D¢pana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Ëragvadh¡di Kv¡tha Cur¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Raktavik¡ra, á°pha (á°tha), DuÀ¶a Vra¸a 
DOSE  - 50-100 gm of the drug for decoction. 
   
  
13757. Talamuli (Rz.)  
TËLAMÍLI (Rhizome) 
T¡lamuli  consists  of  dried  rhizome  of  Curculigo  orchioides  Gaertn.  (Fam. 
Amaryllidaceae), a small herb, upto 30 cm high with tuberous root stock, occurring wild in  
sub-tropical Himalayas from Kumaon eastwards, ascending upto 1830 m in Khasi hills,  
Manipur and the Eastern Ghats, also from Konkan southwards; drug is collected from two  
year old plants, washed well and cleared of rootlets, sliced and dried in shade.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Bh£mitila 
Assamese:Talmuli, Tailmuli 
Bengali:Talmalu, Tallur 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Kalirnusali 
Hindi    :Syahmusali, Kalimusli 
Kannada:Neltal, Neltathigodde, Nelatale, Nelatelegadde 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Nilappenea 
Marathi:Kali musali, Bhuimaddi 
Oriya   :Talamuli 
Punjabi:Syah musali, Musali safed, 
Tamil   :Nilappanai 
Telugu  :Nel tadigadda 
Urdu    :Musali Siyah, Kali Musali 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in transversely cut pieces of 2.5 to 5 cm long, cylindrical, straight to  
slightly curved, cut surface 1.0 to 4.5 cm in dia.; external surface blackish-brown, cut  
surface cream coloured; surface with numerous shallow wrinkles and transverse cracks;  
with a few rootlets and root scars; nodes and internodes prominent; taste, mucilaginous  
and slightly bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Shows a narrow strip of cork, consisting of 5 to 7 rows of light brown cubical to  
rectangular  cells;  secondary  cortex  consists  of  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells,  
densely filled with starch grains and acicular crystals of calcium oxalate, either isolated  
or in bundles, in a few cells; a few small, round to tangentially elongated, lysigenous  
cavities also found scattered in this region; a few vascular bundles found embedded in  
cortical region with phloem towards outer side, and consisting of a few xylem elements;  
138ground tissue consists of parenchymatous cells, some of which contain acicular crystals  
of calcium oxalate; numerous fibro-vascular bundles found scattered throughout the  
region, mostly towards peripheral region having phloem, almost encircled by xylem  
vessels having annular and spiral thickenings; starch grains simple, rounded to oval and  
also compound of 2 to 4 components, measuring 4 to 21 µ  in dia., present in cortical  
and central region, a number of deep red, resin canals found throughout the region,  
mucilage in the form of colourless mass found in a few cortical parenchymatous cells.
Powder - Greyish; vessels with annular and spiral thickenings; simple, round to oval,  
starch grains measuring 4 to 21  µ in dia., and compound starch grains having 2 to 4  
components and a few acicular crystals of calcium oxalate; mucilage in the form of  
colourless mass found in a few cortical parenchymatous cells
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   9    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     17   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using n-Butanol :  
Acetic Acid: Water (4:1:5) shows under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf.  
0.39, 0.77, 0.90 and 0.97 (all yellow). On exposure to Iodine vapour twelve spots appear  
at Rf. 0.06, 0.13, 0.17, 0.25, 0.39, 0.50, 0.62, 0.70, 0.77, 0.88, 0.90 and 0.97 (all yellow).  
On spraying with Dragendorff reagent followed by sodium nitrite three spots appear at  
Rf. 0.39, 0.70 and 0.88 (all light purple). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Tannin, Resin, Sapogenin and Alkaloid
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, Picchila 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :áramahara,  D¡hahara,  Pittahara,  V¤Àya,  B¤hma¸a,  Ras¡yana,  
PuÀtiprada, Balaprada 
 
139IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Gandharvahast¡di Kv¡tha Cur¸a, Candan¡di Cur¸a. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Ar¿a, V¡tar°ga, K¡r¿ya, KÀtakÀ¢¸a 
DOSE  - 3-6 gm of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
14058. Talisa (Drd.Lf.)  
TËLÌáA (Leaves) 
T¡l¢¿a consist of dried needle like leaves of Abies webbiana Lindl (Fam. Pinaceae),  
plant is a tall, evergreen tree with thick, spreading, horizontal branches attaining a height  
of 60 m found in Himalayas at an altitude of 2800-10000 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Patr¡dhyam 
Assamese:Talish 
Bengali:Talish Pala, Taleesh Patra 
English:Himalayan Siver 
Gujrati  :Talish Patra 
Hindi    :Talish Patra 
Kannada:Tales Patra, Talisapathra, Shukodara 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Talisapatra, Taleesapatri 
Marathi:Laghu Taleespatra 
Oriya   :Talis 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Talispatra, Taleesapatri 
Telugu  :Taleesapatri 
Urdu    :Zarnab 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaves flat, 1 to 5.5 cm long, about 2 mm broad; shining, midrib in the upper  
surface channelled down the middle but raised beneath; with two faint white lines on  
either side of the midrib beneath, petiole very short, greyish-brown; odour, terebinthine-
like; taste, astringent. 
b) Microscopic 
Mature leaf shows single layered epidermis on either side covered with thick  
cuticle;  upper  epidermis  followed  by  single  layered  sclerenchymatous  hypodermis,  
lower epidermis shows papillate projections at some places followed by 1 or 2 layers  
sclerenchymatous  hypodermis;  palisade  2  layered;  spongy  parenchyma  4-6  layered;  
vascular bundle single, situated centrally, consisting of xylem and phloem, enclosed by a  
single layered endodermis; xylem on upper side and phloem on lower side; cambium  
inconspicuous; secretory cavities two in numbers, located on either side of vascular  
bundle, stomata sunken type, present only on the lower surface. 
141Powder - Greenish-brown; shows sclerenchymatous cells, palisade, spongy parenchyma  
and a few epidermal cells.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica Gel 'G' using Toluene: Ethylacetate (9:1)  
shows in visible light five spots at Rf. 0.09, 0.41, 0.59, 0.67 (all green) and 0.92 (light  
green). Under U.V. (366 nm) eight fluorescent zones visible at Rf. 0.05 (orange), 0.09  
(blackish) 0.14 (orange), 0.43 (red), 0.54 (blue), 0.62 (blackish red), 0.67 and 0.92 (both  
red). On exposure to iodine vapour eleven spots appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.08, 0.12, 0.17,  
0.39, 0.50, 0.57, 0.65, 0.73, 0.85 and 0.92 (all yellow). On spraying  with Vanillin  
Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 °C for ten minutes eleven spots  
appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.08, 0.12, 0.17, 0.39, 0.50, 0.57, 0.65, 0.73, 0.85 and 0.92 (all  
violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential Oil & Alkaloid.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana, H¤dya, V¡takaph¡pham, ál®Àmapittajit 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   - Dr¡kÀ¡di C£r¸a, T¡l¢s¡di Cur¸a, Bh¡skara Lava¸a,  
Pr¡na·a Gu¶ika, J¡tiph¡l¡di C£r¸a, Puga Khan·a, T¡l
¢s¡di M°daka 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - K¡¿a, Agnim¡ndya,  Hikka,  K¤mi, KÀaya, Mukharoga,  Sv¡¿a,  
Gulma, ËmadoÀa, Chardi, Aruci 
DOSE  - 2-3 gm of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
14259. Tila (Sd.)  
TILA (Seed) 
Tila consists of dried seeds of Sesamum indicum Linn. (Fam, Pedaliaceae), a herb  
extensively cultivated throughout the plains of India upto 1200 m for its seeds. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Tila 
Assamese:Simmasim 
Bengali:Tilagachh 
English:Sesame, Gingelly-oil Seeds 
Gujrati  :Tall 
Hindi    :Tila, Teel, Tili 
Kannada:Accheellu, Ellu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Ellu 
Marathi:Tila 
Oriya   :Til 
Punjabi:Til 
Tamil   :Ellu 
Telugu  :Nuvvulu 
Urdu    :Kunjad 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seed white, brown, grey or black, flattened ovate in shape, smooth or reticulate,  
2.5 to 3 mm long and 1.5 mm broad, one side slightly concave with faint marginal lines  
and an equally faint central line; taste, pleasant and oily. 
b) Microscopic 
Testa of seed shows single layered palisade-like, thin-walled, yellowish coloured  
cells, and the rest of the testa composed of collapsed cells; endosperm 3 layered, rarely  
2 layered, consisting of cellulosic polygonal cells of parenchyma containing fixed oils  
and small aleurone grains; cotyledons two, externally covered with thin cuticle; single  
layered epidermal cell, followed by a single row of palisade- like cells; rest of the  
tissues consist of polygonal, parenchyma cells containing fixed oil and aleurone grains. 
Powder  - Blackish coloured; shows palisade-like cells in surface view, parenchyma  
cells, aleurone grains and oil globules. 
143IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   9    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Fixed Oil                                  Not less than     35   per cent, Appendix    2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate (9 : 1)  
shows under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.57, 0.64 (both light blue) and  
0.72 (blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.08, 0.57, 0.64, 0.72  
and 0.94 (all yellow). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the  
plate for ten minutes at 110o  C seven spots appear at Rf. 0.08, 0.57, 0.64, 0.72 (all  
violet), 0.76, 0.84 (both light violet) and 0.94 (violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Vyavai, Guru, Snigdha, SukÀma 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :Balya,  K®¿ya,  Pittala,  Rasayana,  Sa´gr¡hi,  V¡taghna,  Var¸ya,  
ViÀaghna, Sn®hana, Svarka, Sn®h°paga, KuÀh¶hakara, Vitbardhaka, M
£trabandhaka, M®dhavardhala, Agnivardhaka, Avas¡dakara, K®¿a, K
¤À¸akara,  Kasa  Vardhaka,  Kar¸ap¡livardhaka,  Kaphak°paka,  M
¤dur®caka,  Vrana  Sam¿°dhaka,  Vrana  P¡caka,  Vrana  D¡han¡¿aka,  
Bhagna Pras¡dhaka, V¡jikara, Agnibala Vardhaka 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  N¡rasimha  C£r¸a,  J¡tiphaladya  Cur¸a,  Sama´g¡di  
Curna,  Haridr¡di  L®pa,  V¤Àya,  Pupalika  Y°ga,  
N¡gar¡di  Y°ga,  Til¡di  Upan¡ha,  Til¡di  Y°ga,  
Priyal¡di Y°ga, Must¡di Upan¡ha, Sunthyadi Cur¸a,  
Pathy¡di  Gu¶ika,  Hingv¡di  Y°ga,  P¡niya  KÀ¡ra,  
Bhall¡tak¡di Modaka 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - A¿mari, AkÀir°ga, Atis¡ra, Ëma¿ula, Galaganda, Gulma, Hikka, K
¤mi,  KÀaya,  Kasa,  KuÀ¶ha,  P¢nasa,  Pradara,  Prav¡hika,  
Rakt¡tis¡ra,  Sva¿a,  T¤Àa,  Visarpa,  Udvarta,  Yoni¿ula,  Udara,  
144Ën¡ha,  áirah  á£la,  P¡r¿va  áula,  Rakt¡r¿a,  Gudabhr¡m¿a,  
Vatarakta,  N¡di  Vra¸a,  Svitra,  Granthi,  Upadam¿a,  Vidaraka,  
Alasa,  Kh¡litya,  Palitya,  Prati¿y¡ya,  áankhaka,  á¡kuni  Graha,  
Kumara,  Pit¤m®¿agraha,  Mutr¡ghata,  Dantaroga,  DantaharÀa,  
V¡tika  Mukhar°ga,  Atidgdha,  Pl¢har°ga,  Mu¿ika  Da´¿a,  
Kar¸ap¡li á°ra 
DOSE  - Powder 5-10 gm/day.  
   
  
14560. Tulasi (Sd.)  
TULASI (Seed) 
Tulasi consists of seeds of  Ocimum sanctum  Linn. (Fam. Lamiaceae), an erect,  
branched, annual herb, found throughout the country, and also cultivated
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Surasa, Surasa, Bahumaniri, Bh£taghn 
Assamese:Tulasi 
Bengali:Tulasi 
English:Holi Basil, Sacred Basil 
Gujrati  :Tulsi, Tulasi 
Hindi    :Tulasi 
Kannada:Tulasi, Sri tulasi 
Kashmiri:Tulasi 
Malayalam:Tulasi 
Marathi:Tulasi 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Tulasi 
Tamil   :Tulasi, Thulasi, Thiruthazhai 
Telugu  :Tulasi, Manchi Tulasi, Nalla Tulasi 
Urdu    :Tulsi 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds round to oval, about 0.1 cm long, brown with mucilaginous outer covering,  
slightly notched at the tip and broadly rounded at the base; no odour; taste, pungent, and  
slightly mucilaginous. 
Powder - Brown; shows groups of polygonal, thick-walled, epidermal cells, 28 to 55 µ 
in size; oval to polygonal, parenchymatous cells containing oil globules and starch  
grains simple as well as compound, having 2 to 5 components, single grains measuring 3  
to 17 µ in dia.
Swelling Index- Not less than 5, when determinied as follows:
Introduce the accurately weighed seeds into a 25 ml glass stoppered measuring cylinder.  
The length of the graduated portion of the cylinder should be 125 mm; the internal  
diameter 16 mm subdivided in 0.2 ml and marked from 0 to 25 ml in up wards direction.  
Add 25 ml of water, and shake the mixture thoroughly at intervals of every 10 minutes  
for 1 hour. Allow to stand for 3 hours at room temperature. Measure the volume in ml  
146occupied by the seeds, including any sticky mucilage. Carry out simultaneously not less  
than 3 determination and calculate the mean value of the individual determinations,  
related to 1 g of seeds. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate  
(9:1) as mobile phase shows under U.V. (366 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.36,  
0.56 (both red) and 0.93 (blue). On spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and  
heating the plate for about ten minutes at 110 °C five spots appear at Rf. 0.04, 0.23, 0.36,  
0.70 and 0.93 (all violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Fixed Oil and Mucilage
 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¡hak¤ta,  Vra¸a¿°dhaka,  H¤dya,  K¤mighna,  Kaphahara,  Pittahara,  
V¡tahara, Rucik¤t, D¢pana, ViÀahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Mukt¡di Mahaµjanasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  á°pha,  Aruci,  Hikka,  K¡sa,  K¤mi,  KuÀ¶ha,  M£trak¤cchra,  
Prati¿y¡ya,  áv¡¿a,  P¡r¿va¿£la,  P£tigandha,  Garavi¿a,  Rakta  
Vik¡ra, Jantuvi¿a, Bhutar°ga 
DOSE  - 1-2 gm of the seed in powder form. 
   
  
14761. Tumburu (Ft. )  
TUMBURU (Fruit) 
Tumburu consists of dried fruit of Zanthoxylum armatum DC. Syn. Z. alatum Roxb. 
(Farn. Rutaceae), an armed or erect shrub or small tree, found in the valleys of the  
Himalayas at an altitude of 1000 to 2100 m, in Khasi hills at 600 to 1800 rn, and in the  
Ghats in peninsular India. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:T®j°vati, T®j°vali, T®j°hva 
Assamese:T®j°vati 
Bengali:Tejovati, Nepali Dhania 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Tejbal 
Hindi    :Tejbal, Nepali Dhaniya 
Kannada:Tejapatri, Tumburu, Tejovanti 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Thumboonal, Thumbooni 
Marathi:Tejbal, Tejobalee 
Oriya   :Tejbal 
Punjabi:Tirmira 
Tamil   :Thejyovathi 
Telugu  :Tumburl 
Urdu    :Kabab-e-Khanda (Miswak) 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Reddish-brown, sub-globose, mostly dehisced, follicles, containing a single seed  
in each follicle; seeds, globose, glabrous, shiny black; upto 0.5 cm long, and about 0.3  
cm wide; taste, pungent; odour, aromatic. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Fruit -  Pericarp  shows  large  oil  cavities  and  vascular  tissues  surrounded  by  
parenchymatous cells containing irregular masses of hesperidin and followed by 2 to 5  
layered  palisade-like  cells,  hesperidin  insoluble  in  organic  solvents  but  soluble  in  
potassium hydroxide. 
Seed -  Testa  shows  wide,  very  thick-walled,  irregular,  non-lignified  cells  having  
blackish-brown  contents  and numerous  oil  globules;  tegmen  shows  3  or  4 oval  to  
polygonal tangentially elongated thin-walled parenchymatous cells, followed by 8 to 10  
148layers  tangentially  elongated  tabular  cells  filled  with  reddish-brown  contents;  
endosperm consists of thin-walled, polygonal, parenchymatous cells. 
Powder - Dark brown to black; shows groups of thin-walled, parenchymatous cells, some  
filled with oil globules, and a few with hesperidin; polygonal cells of seed coat and  
separate globules of oil. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate (9:  
1) v/v shows in visible light two spots at Rf. 0.18, 0.35 (both grey). Under U.V. (366  
nm) five spots appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.18, (both blue), 0.38 (violet) 0.55 (violet) and 0.93  
(violet). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at  
105°C for ten minutes seven spots appear at Rf. 0.18, 0.26, 0.35, 0.48, 0.66, 0.76 and  
0.96 (all grey).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Essential Oil. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :D¢pana,  Kaphahara,  P¡cana,  Rucya,  V¡tahara,  Lalapras®ka,  
Cimcim¡yanama, Rasana Samsv®daka 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -  Saptavim¿ati  Guggulu,  Dadhika  Gh¤ta,  Maha  
ViÀagarbha Taila, Hingv¡di Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Agnim¡ndya, Ar¿a, H¤dr°ga, Hikka, K¡¿a, Kantha R°ga, Sv¡¿a,  
Ardita, Kaphaja R°ga, Asya R°ga, Danta R°ga 
DOSE  - 2-4 gm.  
   
14962. Utingana (Sd.)  
UÙI×GANA (Seed) 
Uti´gana  consists of dried mature seeds of Blepharis persica (Burm. f.) O. Kuntze.  
Syn. B. edulis Pers. (Fam. Acanthaceae), a shrub, occurring in Punjab.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Utti´gana 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Ucchata 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Utingun, Chopunivel 
Hindi    :Utangan 
Kannada:Utangana 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Utigana, Utungana 
Marathi:Utangan 
Oriya   :Utingana 
Punjabi:Uttangan 
Tamil   :Uttanjana 
Telugu  :Uttangan 
Urdu    :Utangan 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seed occurs as entire or broken, 0.4 to 0.6 cm long, 0.3 to 0.4 cm broad; heart  
shaped, rough due to network of coarse hairs; cream to light yellow, flat; when soaked in  
water, hairs swell and produce viscid mucilage; mucilagenous on chewing. 
b) Microscopic 
Seed  shows  4  to  6  layers  of  tangentially  elongated,  hyaline,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous seed coat, multicellular, multiseriate columnar, elongated hairs with  
twisted tips present towards outer side of the seed coat; embryo having two cotyledons  
with upper and lower epidermis; upper epidermis followed by 4 to 5 layers of oval to  
polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells and 2 or 3 layers more or less radially 2  
elongated, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells respectively; beneath this a single layer of  
palisade-like cells present; lower epidermis covered with thick cuticle and consisting of  
rounded, isodiametric cells that are larger than those of the upper epidermis. 
Powder - Yellowish-brown; shows fragments of hairs with mucilage, palisade-like oval  
to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchyma cells isolated or in larger or smaller groups. 
150IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     16   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     23   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform : Methanol  
(80:20) shows in visible light four spots at Rf. 0.17 (grey), 0.25 (light grey), 0.79 (light  
yellow), 0.87 (yellow). Under U.V. (366 nm) six fluorescent zones are yisible at Rf.  
0.09, 0.17 (both black), 0.23 (light black) 0.33, 0.69 (both light blue) and 0.90 (dark  
blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.13, 0.18, 0.26, 0.36,  
0.64, 0.75 and 0.90 (all yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent followed by 5%  
Methanolic-Sulphuric acid one spot appear at Rf. 0.87 (orange). On spraying with 5%  
methanolic sulphuric acid eight spots appear at Rf. 0.14, 0.22, 0.33 (grey), 0.64 (violet),  
0.71 (yellowish), 0.75 (brownish), 0.81 (yellow), and 0.90 (brown). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycosides and Tannin
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, Picchila, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma :V¤Àya, Mutr¡la 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Kum¡ryas¡va 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Mutrak¤cchra, Klaibya 
DOSE  - 3-6 gm of the drug in powder form. 
   
  
15163. Varahi (Rz.)  
VËRËHI (Rhizome) 
V¡r¡hi consists of dried cut pieces of rhizome of Dioscorea bulbifera Linn. (Fam. 
Dioscoreaceae), a large unarmed climber found throughout India ascending upto 1800 m in  
the Himalayas. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:V¡r¡hika¸da 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Ratalu 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Dukkarkanda 
Hindi    :Varahi Kanda, Genthi 
Kannada:Kunta Genusu, Heggenusu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Varahi 
Marathi:Dukarkanda 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :-- 
Telugu  :Kaya Pendazam 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in cut pieces, 0.5 to 0.7 cm thick, 2 to 3 cm in dia.; a few root and  
root  scars  present;  outer  surface  dark  brown,  inner  yellow  to  light  brown;  odour,  
indistinct; taste, bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Rhizome shows a cork composed of 10 to 15 layers of thick-walled, tangentially  
elongated rectangular cells; outer few cells filled with reddish-brown contents; cortex  
consists of oval to elliptical, thin-walled parenchymatous cells; ground tissue, forming  
major portion of drug composed of oval to polygonal cells having a few scattered closed  
vascular bundles; starch grains found both in cortex and ground tissues, but abundant in  
ground tissue, rounded to oval, three sided with rounded angles or rod-shaped, simple,  
solitary or in groups, 11 to 28 µ in diameter; hilum present at the narrower extremity. 
Powder - Slightly yellowish-brown; shows parenchymatous cells; varying sizes of cone  
and rod-shaped starch grains measuring 11 to 28 µ in dia. 
152IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using n-Butanol : Acetic acid:  
Water (4: 1 :5) shows three spots at Rf. 0.79 (light yellow), 0.85 (light yellow) and 0.92  
(grey) in visible light. Under U.V. (366 nm) six fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.48,  
0.59, 0.73 (all light blue), 0.78 (grey), 0.85 (blue) and 0.92 (grey). On exposure to  
Iodine vapour seven spots appear at Rf. 0.12, 0.34, 0.59, 0.73, 0.78, 0.85 and 0.92 (all  
yellow). On spraying with 5% Methanolic-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate  
for ten minutes at 110 °C six spots appear at Rf. 0.34, 0.59, 0.66 (all light grey), 0.73,  
0.85 and 0.92 (all grey). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Saponins-Steroidal, Saponins. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Balya,  Pittakara,  Ras¡yana,  Svarya,  V¤¿ya,  Var¸ya,  Sl®Àmaghna,  
Ayurvardhana, Agniv¤ddhikara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - N¡rasimha C£r¸a, Vastyamayantaka Gh¤ta, Pancanimba  
C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - K¤mi, Kandu, KuÀ¶ha, Pram®ha 
DOSE  - 3-6 gm.  
   
  
15364. Vrshabhu (Rt.)  
VARâËBHU (Root) 
VarÀ¡bhu  consists  of  dried  root  of  Trianthema  portulacastrum  Linn.  Syn.  T. 
monogyna  Linn.,  T. obcordata  Roxb. (Fam. Aizoaceae), a prostrate, glabrous, typically  
post monsoon annual herb, found almost throughout the country as a weed in cultivated  
and waste lands. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Sv®ta M£la, á°thagh¸i, Vr¿°heev 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Sabuni 
English:Hoase Purslane 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Saphed Punamava, Bish Kharpra, Pathar 
Kannada:Muchchugane, Sihi Punarnava 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Thazhuthama, Jamizhama 
Marathi:Sweta Punarnava 
Oriya   :Sweta Puruni, Gothapurni 
Punjabi:Sanaya 
Tamil   :Saranai, Mukuruttai 
Telugu  :Galijeru 
Urdu    :Bish Khapra 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root mostly twisted, consisting of tap root, 8 to 21 cm long, about 0.5 cm thick,  
with several lateral rootlets, external surface light greyish-yellow; fracture, short; no  
characteristic odour and taste. 
b) Microscopic 
Mature root shows anamolous secondary growth; cork 5 to 8 layered; secondary  
cortex  narrow  zone  consisting  of  round  to  polygonal,  tangentially  elongated,  thin-
walled, parenchymatous cells, a few cells containing groups of prismatic crystals of  
calcium  oxalate;  below  secondary  cortex  five  concentric  bands  of  vascular  tissue;  
vessels  of  varying  sizes  occurring  alongwith  xylem  fibres  and  phloem;  phloem  
composed  of  thin  walled  cells  having  intercellular  spaces  a  few  cells  containing  
prismatic  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  a  few  rows  of  polygonal,  thin  walled,  
parenchymatous cells occur in rings; medullary rays prominent in middle of the cortical  
region and in the second or third vascular bundle ring; centre mostly occupied by a  
single vascular bundle strand with two isolated groups of phloem. 
154IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     11   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Acetone: Water: Cone.  
Ammonia (90 : 78 : 3) shows under U.V. (366 nm) three conspicuous fluorescent zones  
at Rf. 0.20, 0.33 and 0.91 (all sky blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour one conspicuous  
spot  appears  at Rf.  0.11  (yellow). On  spraying  with  Dragendorff  reagent  one  spot  
appears at Rf. 0.11 (yellow).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Glycoside
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Bh®dana, D¢pana, H¤dya, Kaphahara, Rucya, Vatahara, Mutrala 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Su¿kamaulaka Taila, Kumary¡sava, Dhanvatara Gh¤ta,  
Sukum¡raka Gh¤ta, Punarn¡vadyariÀ¶a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - á°pha, Agnim¡ndya, Ar¿a, Gulma, H¤dr°ga, Jvara, P¡n·u, Udara  
Roga, GaraviÀa, Vasti áula, UrahkÀta, Yak¤ta Óvam Pl¢ha Roga 
DOSE  - 2-5 gm of the drug in powder form.  
   
  
15565. Vasa (Rt.)  
VËSË  (Root) 
V¡s¡ consists of dried root of  Adhatoda zeylanica  Medic. Syn.  A. vasica  Nees 
(Fam. Acanthaceae); a sub-herbaceous bush, found throughout the year in plains and sub-
Himalayan tracts of the country ascending upto 1200 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:V¤¿a, A¶ar£¿a, V¡saka, Simh¡sya, Vajidana 
Assamese:Titabahak, Bahak, Vachaka 
Bengali:Bakas, Basak 
English:Vasaka, Malabar Nut tree 
Gujrati  :Ardusi, Aradusi, Araduso 
Hindi    :Adoosa, Arusa, Aduss 
Kannada:Adusoye 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Adalodakam, Adarooshaka 
Marathi:Adulsa, Vasa 
Oriya   :Vasanga, Basanga 
Punjabi:Vishuti, Bhekar, Vansa, Arusa 
Tamil   :Adatodai 
Telugu  :Adda, Saramu 
Urdu    :Adusa(Arusa) 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in cut pieces of 8 to 13 cm long, 1.5 to 3.0 cm in dia.; hard, woody,  
almost cylindrical, tap root having lateral branches, rough due to longitudinal cracks or  
fissures; greyish-brown to dark brown externally; creamish-white internally; fracture,  
hard; taste, bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Shows 6 to 15 layers of rectangular to slightly tangentially elongated, thin-walled  
cork cells; secondary cortex wide consisting of rectangular to polygonal, thin-walled  
parenchymatous  cells  a  few  containing  oil  globules,  followed  by  more  or  less  
discontinuous, annular band of mostly rectangular groups of stone cells having distinct  
pits  and  striations;  secondary  phloem  composed  of  15  to  20  layered,  rectangular,  
elongated,  thin-walled  cells  having  usual  elements;  secondary  xylem  composed  of  
vessels, fibres, parenchyma and rays; vessel simple pitted; xylem rays mostly uniseriate,  
a few four seriate rays are also present; starch grains simple and compound, with 2 to 3  
156components, round to oval, 3 to 6  µ  in dia., having concentric striations and hilum,  
present in secondary cortex and secondary phoem.
Powder  - Brownish-grey; shows fragments of cork cells; simple pitted vessels; stone  
cells mostly in groups; starch grains simple and compound having 2 to 3 components,  
round to oval, 3 to 6 µ in dia. having concentric striations and hilum. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform: Methanol (80  
: 20) shows under U.V. (366 nm) four fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.57, 0.63 (both red), 0.83  
(sky blue) and 0.87 (yellow). On exposure to Iodine vapour six spots appear at Rf. 0.07,  
0.27, 0.52, 0.72, 0.87 and 0.93 (all yellow). On spraying with Dragendorff reagent two  
spots appear at Rf. 0.27 and 0.52 (both orange).
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids (Vasicine and Vasicinol) and Oil. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :H¤dya, Kaphahara, Pittahara, Rakta¿odhaka, Svara, Vivardhaka, V¡tak
¤t 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Cyavanapr¡¿a Aval®ha, Kanak¡sava, B¤hata MaµjiÀ¡di  
Kv¡tha Cur¸a, Pancatikta Gh¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -  áv¡sa,  Chardi,  Jvara,  K¡sa,  K¤mi,  KÀaya,  KuÀ¶ha,  M®ha,  
Raktapitta, T¤Àa, V¡ta Roga 
DOSE  - 3-6 gm.  
   
  
15766. Vishamushti (Sd)  
VIâAMUâÙHI (Seed) 
ViÀamuÀh¶i consists of dried seed of Strychnos nux-vomica Linn. (Fam. Fabaceae),  
a tree, upto a height of 9 to 15 m found throughout tropical parts of the country upto 360 m  
altitude in the moist deciduous forest. Seed is poisonous and can produce ill effects.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:K¡raskara, Vi¿atindu, K¡katin·uka 
Assamese:Ajraki, Habbul gurab, Kucila 
Bengali:Kuchila 
English:Poison-nut tree, Nux vomica 
Gujrati  :Konchala, Jher Kochla, Kuchla, Zer Kochalu 
Hindi    :Kuchala, Kuchila, Bish tendu 
Kannada:Kanjihemushti, Manjira, Hemmushti, Ittongi, Kasarkayi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kajjl, Kanniram 
Marathi:Kajra, Kuchla 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Kuchla 
Tamil   :Yettimaram, Kakotee, Ettikottai, Ettikkai 
Telugu  :Mushti, Mushini 
Urdu    :Azaraqi, Kuchla 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds greenish-grey to grey, extremely hard, silky to touch with a satiny sheen;  
disc-shaped, almost flat, umbonate but a few seeds somewhat irregularly bent, 10 to 30  
mm in  diameter, 4 to  6 mm  thick, margin  rounded  or  depressed;  when  cut open,  
endosperm found to be horny, having a central cavity in which the embryo is situated  
with two small, thin, cordate, leafy cotyledons with 5 to 7 veins and a terete radicle;  
odourless. 
b) Microscopic 
Seed shows single layered epidermis, each epidermal cell elongated externally to  
form closely appresed trichomes, lignified, comprising of pitted bulbous base and a  
thick-walled narrowly elongated, projection; trichome slightly bent beyond the base,  
with about ten strongly lignified ribs of thickenings; inner testa composed of collapsed  
parenchymatous cells with yellowish-brown contents; outermost layer of endosperm  
consists  of  palisade-like  cells  while  the  inner  layers  have  thick-walled,  cellulosic  
polyhedral  cells,  showing  plasmodesmata;  endosperm  cells  also  contain  oil,  and  
aleurone grams. 
158Powder  -  Greenish-grey;  shows  narrowly  elongated  and  slightly  bent  thick-walled,  
lignified  trichomes  with  bulbous  base  without  ramification,  thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells filled with yellowish-brown content, oil globules and aleurone  
grains. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.2  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Assay                                      Not less than      1.2  per cent of strychnine   
 
ASSAY 
Weigh accurately about 109 in fine powder, add 100 ml of a 33 per cent v/v  
mixture of chloroform in solvent ether and set aside for ten minutes. Add 5 ml of dilute  
ammonia  solution  and  shake  continuously  for  six  hours.  Transfer  to  a  continuous  
extraction apparatus with more of the same solvent mixture and extract for two hours.  
Filter  the  solvent  extract,  washing  the  filter  with  solvent  ether  and  extract  with  
successive quantities of 20 ml, 20 ml , 10 ml and 10 ml of 1N sulphuric acid, until  
complete extraction of the alkaloids is effected. Combine the acid extracts and make  
alkaline with dilute ammonia solution. Extract with successive quantities of 20 ml, 20 ml  
ml and 10 ml of  chloroform until complete extraction of the alkaloids  is effected.  
Evaporate the chloroform, add 5 ml of alcohol and evaporate to dryness. Dissolve the  
residue in a mixture of 15 ml of a 3 per cent w/v solution of sulphuric acid and 2 ml of  
nitric acid, add a few crystals of sodium nitrite and set aside at 18 °C for thirty minutes.  
Transfer to a separator containing 20 ml of solution of sodium hydroxide, shake for two  
minutes and then shake with 20 ml of chloroform, separate the chloroform solution,  
wash it with 5 ml of solution of sodium hydroxide and then with two quantities each of  
10  ml  of  water.  Continue  the  extraction  with  successive  quantities  of  10  ml  of  
chloroform,  until  complete  extraction  of  the  alkaloids  is  effected,  washing  each  
chloroform solution separately with the 5 ml of solution of sodium hydroxide and with  
the two quantities of water, which were used for washing the first chloroform solution.  
Titrate the second wash with 0.1 N sulphuric acid using solution of methyl orange as  
indicator if more than 0.1 ml is required, wash the combined chloroform solutions with  
further quantities, each of 10 ml of water until on titration not more than 0.1 ml of 0.1 N  
sulphuric acid is required. Remove the chloroform, add 5 ml of alcohol, evaporate, and  
dry for thirty minutes, at 100 °C. Dissolve the residue in 10 ml of 0.1 N sulphuric acid  
and titrate the excess of acid with 0.1 N sodium hydroxide, using solution of methlyl  
orange as indicator. Each ml of 0.1 N sulphuric acid is equivalent to 0.03344 g of  
strychinine, multiply the result by 1.02 to correct for loss of strychinine.
 
159T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  using  Toluene:  Ethylacetate:  
Diethylamine (70:20:10) shows on spraying with Dragendorff reagent followed by 5%  
Methanolic-Sulphuric acid two orange spots at Rf. 0.44 and 0.65 corresponding to that of  
brucine and strychnine.
  
CONSTITUENTS  - Alkaloids, Indole Alkaloids, Strychnine & Brucine, Monoterpenoid  
Glycoside (Loganin), α, β -Colubrine, Vomicine.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Gr¡hi, Madak¡raka, V¡talam, Kaphan¡¿aka, Pittan¡¿aka, Raktad°Àa  
N¡¿aka,  Vrana¿°dhana,  Parama  V®danahara,  Agnir®ta,  Rujahara,  
Jantun¡¿ana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - K¤mimudgara Rasa, ViÀatinduka Taila, MahaviÀagarbha  
Taila, Agnitundi Vati, Ók¡ngav¢ra Rasa, ViÀatinduka  
Vati, Navaj¢vana Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   - Agnim¡ndya, Ar¿a, Ardita, Ka¸du, Klaibya, Vi¿£cika, Vra¸a,  
PakÀ¡gh¡ta, N¡di Daurbalya, Kushha, G¤dhrasi 
DOSE  - 60-125 mg powder of the shodhita drug. 
   
  
16067. Vrischikalli (W.P.)  
VÎáCIKËLI (Whole Plant) 
V¤¿cik¡li  consists  of  dried  whole  plant  of  Tragia  involucrata  Linn.  (Fam. 
Euphorbiaceaee), a perennial, evergreen, twiner, more or less hispid with scattered stinging  
hairs, distributed throughout India from Punjab and Lower Himalayas eastwards to Assam  
and Meghalaya, ascending upto an altitude of 750 m and southwards to Kerala. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:-- 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Shedha Songi 
English:Scorpion Tail Plant 
Gujrati  :Vichaati 
Hindi    :Vahanta, Vrishi-Kali 
Kannada:Haligilu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Terkkada 
Marathi:Vrischikali 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Thai Kodu Kkuppoondu 
Telugu  :-- 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root  - Occurs in pieces of 2 to 10 cm long and 0.3 to 1.3 cm in dia., woody, hard,  
cylindrical, ribbed at some places, more or less rough due to presence of secondary roots  
and root scars; light brown; no characteristic odour and taste. 
Stem  - Cylindrical, slender, twining 0.2 to 0.6 cm in diameter, elongated, stinging to  
touch, and having fine ridges and furrows; light grey; moderately hard; internal surface  
whitish, composed of loosely arranged tissues; fracture, fibrous; no characteristic odour  
and taste. 
Leaf  - Simple, petiolate, stipulate, stinging to touch, linear-oblong to broadly ovate,  
cordate or oblong-lanceolate, acute or acuminate at apex, margin serrate; 1.5 to 5.5 cm  
long, 1 to 3 cm broad, slightly yellowish-green; no characteristic odour and taste. 
 
161b) Microscopic 
Root  -  Root  shows  nearly  circular  outline;  cork  consisting  of  3  to  10  layered,  
tangentially elongated, thin-walled cells; secondary cortex narrow consisting of fairly  
large, polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells; rosette crystals of calcium oxalate  
and some fibres present in the region; secondary phloem appears in form of conical  
caps, composed of sieve tubes, companion cells, parenchyma, fibres and phloem rays;  
fibres present in small groups of 2 to 4 cells arranged in tangential rows alternating with  
phloem elements; rosette crystals of calcium oxalate present in phloem parenchyma;  
secondary xylem forms major part of root composed of vessels, tracheids, parenchyma,  
fibres and xylem rays; vessels solitary or 2 or 3 to a group, having simple pits; fibres  
and tracheids having thick-walled and blunt ends; medullary rays 1 or 2 cells wide,  
rectangular to radially elongated and thick-walled; some cells contain starch grains and  
rosettes of calcium oxalate present in those towards periphery; starch grains rounded to  
oval in shape, measuring 4 to 9 µ in diameter. 
Stem - Mature stem shows cork composed of 3 to 8 layered, thin-walled cells; at a few  
places epidermis shows the presence of glandular and stinging hairs; secondary cortex a  
wide  zone,  consisting  of  tangentially  elongated,  thin-walled,  parenchymatous  cells;  
some cells contain rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; some laticifers present scattered  
in  this  region;  secondary  cortex  followed  by  zone  of  pericycle  fibres  with  highly  
thickened walls, arranged in groups; secondary phloem composed of sieve elements,  
phloem  fibres  and  phloem  parenchyma;  phloem  fibres  thick-walled,  some  phloem  
parenchyma cells contain rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; laticifers scattered in the  
secondary  phloem  similar  to  those  found  in  secondary  cortex;  cambium  narrow  
consisting  of thin-walled, tangentially  elongated cells; secondary xylem  in form of  
continuous  cylinder  traversed  by  narrow  xylem  rays;  xylem  consists  of  vessels,  
tracheids, xylem fibres and xylem parenchyma; vessels numerous distributed uniformly  
in  groups  or  singles;  in  macerated  material  vessels  vary  in  shape  and  size,  with  
transverse to oblique perforation, lignified with pitted walls; xylem parenchyma usually  
rectangular  having  simple  pits,  xylem  rays  uni  to  triseriate,  uniseriate  being  more  
common and usually 2 to 15 cells high, having pitted walls; pits consists of large, thin-
walled parenchymatous cells, some cells with rosette crystals of calcium oxalate.
Leaf-
Petiole - shows irregular outline due to fine ridges and furrows; epidermis single layered  
having  some  unicellular  glandular  and  stinging  hairs;  collenchyma  4  to  7  layered,  
followed by polygonal, thin-walled parenchymatous cells containing rosette crystals of  
calcium oxalate; vascular bundles collateral, five in number corresponding to ridges;  
centre occupied by oval to angular, thin-walled parenchymatous cells containing rosette  
crystals of calcium oxalate. 
Midrib  -  nearly  biconvex  in  outline;  epidermis  consists  of  single  layered,  oval,  
parenchymatous cells covered externally by a thin cuticle; some unicellular glandular  
162and stinging hairs present on both surfaces; epidermis followed by 3 or 4 layers of  
collenchymatous cells; stele composed of single, collateral vascular bundle; ground  
tissue  composed  of  3  or  4  layers of  thin-walled,  polygonal,  parenchymatous  cells;  
rosette crystals of calcium oxalate present in parenchyma and phloem parenchyma. 
Lamina - shows dorsiventral structure; epidermis on either side; upper epidermal cells  
radially elongated and larger in size; lower ones oval-shaped, tangentially elongated  
both covered externally by thick cuticle; glandular and stinging hairs present on both  
surfaces similar to those present in midrib; palisade 1 or 2 layered; spongy parenchyma  
5 to 7 layered of loosely arranged cells, some contain rosette crystals of calcium oxalate;  
small veins found traversing spongy tissue at certain places. 
Powder -Light greenish-yellow; shows groups of fibres, vessels with simple pits and  
spiral thickening, rosette crystals of calcium oxalate, simple rounded starch grains,  
fragments of lamina showing palisade and groups of spongy parenchyma, unicellular  
stinging hairs
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   14   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     11   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel G plate using Chloroform : Ethyl acetate:  
Formic acid (5:4:1) shows under visible light two spots at Rf. 0.92 (light grey) and 0.95  
(yellowish green). Under U.V. (366 nm) two fluorescent zones are visible at Rf. 0.92  
(blue) and 0.95 (pink). On exposure to Iodine vapur six spots appear at Rf. 0.08, 0.27,  
0.40, 0.50, 0.92 and 0.95 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Ferric chloride solution and  
heating the plate for ten minutes a 110o C two spots appear a Rf. 0.92 and 0.95 (both  
bluish grey). 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u 
Guna :UÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Balya, V¡takara, áuddik¤t, H¤t¿uddhik¤t 
 
163IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - Vid¡ryadi Kv¡tha Cur¸a, Vid¡ry¡di Gh¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - Ar°caka, Raktapitta, Vibandha 
DOSE  - 3-6 gm. 
   
  
16468. Yava (W.P.) 
YAVA (Whole Plant) 
Yava consists of dried whole plant of Hordeum vulgare Linn. Syn. H. sativum Pers. 
(Fam. Poaceae), an annual, erect, herb, 50 to 100 cm high, cultivated chiefly in North  
India, for its de husked fruits known as Barley in trade.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Divya 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Jab, Jau, Yava 
English:Barley 
Gujrati  :Jau, Java, Jau 
Hindi    :Yay, Jav, Jau 
Kannada:Jave godi, Barli Akki 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Yavam, Baarli, Barley 
Marathi:Jav 
Oriya   :Jav, Javadhana, Yava, Bansa 
Punjabi:Jav, Jau 
Tamil   :Barliarisi, Yavam 
Telugu  :Yavalu, Barlibiyam, Tella Tumma, Barley 
Urdu    :Jau  
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Fibrous, 0.5 to 1 cm thick; cylindrical, glabrous, greyish-brown.
Stem - Cylindrical, 0.4 to 0.6 cm thick; hollow, slightly flattened, smooth; internode  
long, shining yellow; node short, bearing sheath; fracture, fibrous.
Leaf - Linear-Ianceolate, 15 to 25 cm long, upper one dose to the spike; sheath smooth,  
striate; yellowish-grey. 
Inflorescence - Spike, terminal, linear-oblong, compressed spikelet sessile, 6 to 8 cm  
long, 6-rowed type; dark cream.
Fruit - A caryopsis, elliptic, oblong, ovoid and tapering at both ends; smooth, about 1 cm  
long and 0.2 to 0.3 cm wide; dorsally compressed and flattened on the sides with a  
shallow longitudinal furrow; 3 to 5 ridged having shallow depression between them;  
165grains tightly enclosed and adhering to the lemma and palea; a long awn present on the  
palea; pale greenish-yellow; taste, sweetish acrid. 
 
b) Microscopic 
Root -  Shows  single  layered  epidermis,  covered  by  striated  cuticle;  cortex  
composed of about 4 to 6 layers of round to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous  
cells having intercellular spaces; vascular bundles arranged in discontinuous ring, each  
having usual elements; pith very wide composed of round to polygonal thin-walled,  
parenchymatous cells having intercellular spaces. 
Stem - Shows single layered epidermis, covered by thick cuticle; hypodermis composed  
of 5 to 6 layered, round to polygonal, lignified, sclerenchymatous cells; ground tissue  
consisting of 5 to 7 layered, round to polygonal, thin-walled, parenchymatous cells  
having  intercellular  spaces;  vascular  bundles  containing  of  usual  elements  found  
scattered in ground tissues. 
Leaf - Shows single layered epidermis covered by thick cuticle on either surface; a few  
big  or  bulliform  cells  are  present  in  upper  and  lower  epidermis,  mesophyll  not  
differentiated  into  palisade  and  spongy  parenchyma;  vascular  bundles  conjoint,  
collateral, closed, each covered by bundle sheath; stomata paracytic, present on both  
surfaces; stomatal number 9 to 17 per sq. mm on lower surface. 5 to 8 per sq. mm on  
upper surface; stomatal index 15 to 23 on lower surface, 9 to 15 upper surface. 
Fruit -shows single layered epidermis consisting of crescent-shaped, round to oval wavy  
walled cells, followed by 2 or 3 layers of thick-walled, sclerenchymatous fibres; below  
the sclerenchyma are present irregular, square or quadrilateral, spongy parenchymatous  
cells, a few cell walls having silica bodies through which run the fibro-vascular bundles  
of the ribs, followed by more or less, polygonal inner epidermal cells, a few inner  
epidermal cells having unicellular claw-shaped hair and stomata; pericarp composed of  
cells  with  more  or  less  compressed  parenchymatous  cells;  seed  coat  appears  as  a  
colourless line; perisperm composed  of cells with more or  less wavy walls having  
narrow lumens; endosperm divided into two zones, 2 to 4 cells deep aleurone layers, and  
the rest starch layers; starch grains simple, round to oval, measuring 3 to 30 µ in dia. 
Powder -  Light  creamish-yellow;  shows  fragments  of  epidermal  cells,  parenchyma,  
groups  of  tubular,  elongated  lignified  cells,  polygonal,  thin-walled  parenchymatous  
epidermal cells of palea with intercellular spaces, in surface view, thin-walled, conical  
trichomes with large lumen, measuring 30 to 180 µ in length and upto 20 µ in width and 
stomata, selerenchymatous fibres, scalariform vessels, abundant round to oval, simple  
starch grains having concentric striations, measuring 3 to 30 µ in dia. 
166IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' using n-Butanol : Acetic acid : Water  
(4:1:5) shows under U.V. (366nm) nine fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.15, 0.28, 0.42, 0.52,  
0.59, 0.67, 0.85, 0.93 and 0.96 (all blue). On exposure to Iodine vapour nine spots appear  
at Rf. 0.10, 0.15, 0.39, 0.48, 0.56, 0.67, 0.85, 0.93 and 0.96 (all yellow). On spraying  
with 5% Phosphomolybdic acid reagent and heating the plate for fifteen minutes at  
105°C nine spots appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.24. 0.39, 0.48, 0.56, 0.67, 0.85, 0.93 and 0.96 (all  
blue). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Proteins, Carbohydrate, free Amino-acids, Vitamins, Tannins and  
Flavonoid glycosides-Luteolin and Orientin. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :RukÀa, M¤du, Aguru 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma :Kaphapittahara,  L®khana,  M®d°hara,  M®dhyavardhaka,  Svara  
Vardhaka, V¡tahara, V¤Àya, Vr¸a Vardhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  - (No Formulations)
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  - K¡sa, P¢nasa, Sv¡¿a, Urusthambha 
DOSE  - 10-20 gm. 
  
167THE AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA  
OF INDIA
PART- I
VOLUME – V
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH
Contents   |   Monographs   |   Abbreviations   |   Appendices
Legal Notices   |   General Notices
Note: This e-Book contains  Computer Database generated Monographs which are reproduced from official publication. The  
order of contents under the sections of Synonyms, Rasa, Guna, Virya, Vipaka, Karma, Formulations, Therapeutic uses may be 
shuffled, but the contents are same from the original source. However, in case of doubt, the user is advised to refer the official  
book.
i
CONTENTS
Legal Notices
General Notices
MONOGRAPHS
S.NoPlant Name Botanical NamePage 
No.
(as per book)
1ËMRA HARIDRË (Rhizome) Curcuma amada Roxb. 1
2ANISÍNA (Fruit) Pimpinella anisum Linn 3
3A×KOLAH(Leaf) Alangium salviifolium (Linn.f.) Wang 5
4ËRAGVËDHA(Stem bark) Cassia fistula Linn 8
5ËSPHOÙË (Root) Vallaris Solanacea  Kuntze 10
6BASTËNTRÌ(Root) Argyreia nervosa (Burm.f.)Boj. 12
7BHURJAH (Stem Bark) Betula utilis D.Don 14
8CAÛÚË (Root) Angelica Archangelica Linn. 16
9CORAKAH (Root Sock) Angelica glauca Edgw. 18
10DARBHA (Root) Imperata cylindrica (Linn) Beauv. 21
11DHANVAYËSAH (Whole Plant) Fagonia cretica Linn. 23
12DRAVANTÌ(Seed) Jatropha glandulifera Roxb. 26
13DUGDHIKË (Whole Plant) Euphorbia prostrata W.Ait 28
14ELAVËLUKAê (Seed) Prunus  avium Linn.f. 31
15GAÛÚÌRA (Root) Coleus forskohlii Briq. 33
16GAVEDHUKA (Root) Coix lachryma-jobi LInn 35
17GHOÛÙË (Fruit) Ziziphus xylopyrus Willd. 37
18GUNDRËH (Rhizome and Fruit) Typha australis Schum. and Thonn. 39
19HIêSRË(Root) Capparis  spinosa Linn. 41
20HI×GUPATRÌ (Leaf) Ferula jaeschkeana Vatke 43
21ITKAÙA (Root) Sesbania bispinosa W.F.Wight 45
22ITKAÙA(Stem) Sesbania bispinosa W.F.Wight 47
23JALAPIPPALÌ (Whole Plant) Phyla nodiflora Greene 49
ii24JÌVAKAH (Pseudo Bulb) Malaxis acuminata D.Don 52
25KADARAH(Heart Wood) Acacia suma (Buch-Ham) 54
26KËKAJA×GHË (Seed) Peristrophe bicalyculata (Retz)Nees 56
27KËKANAJA (Fruit) Physalis alkekengi Linn 58
28KËLÌYAKA (Root and Stem) Coscinium fenestratum (Gaertn.) Colebr 60
29KAPÌTANA (Stem Bark) Thespesia populnea(L.) Soland .ex  
Correa63
30KARKAáA (Root) Momordica dioica Roxb.ex.Willd 65
31KARÛASPHOÙË (Seed) Cardiospermum halicacabum Linn 67
32KARÛASPHOÙË (Root) Cardiospermum halicacabum Linn 69
33KATTÎÛA (Whole Plant) Cymbopogon citrates (DC) Stapf 71
34KEBUKA(Rhizome) Costus speciousus (Koerning ex Retz) 74
35KHAKHASA (Seed) Papaver somniferum Linn 76
36KHATMÌ(Root) Althea officinalis Linn 78
37KHATMÌ(Seed) Althea officinalis Linn 80
38KHÍBKALËN (Seed) Sisymbrium irio Linn 82
39KODRAVAH (Grain) Paspalum scrobiculatum Linn 84
40KâÌRAKËKOLÌ (Bulb) Fritillaria royelei Hook 86
41KâHÌRAVIDËRÌ (Root) Ipomoea digitata Linn. 88
42KULAØJANA (Rhizome) Alpinia galanga Willd. 90
43KUMBHÌKAH(Seed) Careya arborea Roxb 93
44LATËKARA×JA (Seed) Caesalpinia bonduc(Linn) Roxb. 95
45LAVALÌPHALA (Fruit) Phyllanthus acidus (Lin.)Sklees 98
46MADHÍLIKË (Root) Eleusine corocana(L.) Gaertn. 100
47MAHËMEDË (Rhizome and  
Root)Polygonatum cirrhifolium Royle 102
48MADHUSNUHÌ (Tuberous  
Root)Smilax china Linn 104
iii49MEDËSAKAH (Stem Bark) Listea chinensis Lam 106
50MEDËSAKAH (Wood) Listea chinensis Lam 108
51MEâAáÎNGÌ (Leaf) Gymnema sylvestre R.Br 110
52MEâAáÎNGÌ (Root) Gymnema sylvestre R.Br 113
53NANDÌ (Root) Ficus arnottiana Miz. 115
54NÌLAJHINÙÌ (Root) Barleria strigosa Willd 117
55NIMBA (Root Bark) Azadirachta indica A.Juss 119
56NIMBA (Flower) Azadirachta indica A.Juss 121
57NIMBA (Fruit) Azadirachta indica A.Juss 123
58PALËáAH (Seed) Butea monosperma (Lam.)Kuntze 125
59PALËáAH (Dried Flower) Butea monosperma (Lam.)Kuntze 127
60PËRASÌKAYAVËNÌ (Seed) Hyoscyamus niger Linn 130
61PAÙÙÍRA (Whole Plant) Aerva lanata (Linn.)Juss 132
62PÌLÍH (Fruit) Salvadora persica Linn 135
63PÌLÍH (Leaf) Salvadora persica Linn 137
64PÌLÍH (Root) Salvadora persica Linn 140
65POÙAGALA (Root) Typha elephantina Roxb. 142
66PUDÌNËH (Aerial Part) Mentha viridis Linn 144
67PULLËNÌ (Leaf) Calycopteris floribunda Lam. 146
68PULLËNÌ (Root) Calycopteris floribunda Lam. 148
69PULLËNÌ (Stem) Calycopteris floribunda Lam. 150
70PÍTÌKARAØJA (Stem Bark) Caesalpinia crista Linn 152
71RÓÛUKA (Seed) Vitex negundo Linn 154
72RIDDHI (Tuber) Habenaria intermidia D.Don 157
73ROHÌâA (Whole Plant) Cymbopogon martini (Roxb.) Wats. 159
74RÍMÌMASTAGÌ (Resin) Pistacia lentiscus Linn 162
75SARALA (Exudate) Pinus roxburghii Sagrent 164
iv76SARPAGANDHË (Root) Rauwlolfia serpentina (Linn)  
Benth.ex.Kurz166
77áVETAPUNARNAVË  (Root) Borhaavia verticillata Poir 168
78TAILAPARÛAH (Leaf) Eucalyptus globules Labill 170
79TINIáAH (Wood) Ougenia oojeinensis (Roxb)Hochr 172
80TINTIÚÌKAH (Aerial Part) Rhus parviflora Roxb 174
81TRAPUâAê (Seed) Cucumis sativus Linn. 177
82TÍNÌ (Stem Bark) Cedrela toona Roxb. 179
83VANDË (Leaf) Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh. 181
84VANDË (Stem) Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh. 183
85VANDË (Aerial Root) Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh. 185
86VANDË (Flower) Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh. 187
87VANDË (Fruit) Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh. 189
88VANYAJÌRAKA (Fruit) Centratherum anthelminticum (L.)  
Kuntze191
89VIDËRÌKANDA (Tuber) Pueraria tuberosa DC 193
90VIRALË (Stem Bark) Diospyros exsculpta Buch-Ham 195
91VIáALË (Root) Trichosanthes bracteata (Lam) Voigt 197
92VYËGHRANAKHA (Fruit) Capparis horrida Linn 199
vAppendix-1
1.1 Apparatus for Tests and Assays
1.1.1-Nessler Cylinder
1.1.2-Sieves
1.1.2-Thermometers
1.1.4-Volumetric Glass-ware
1.1.5- Weights and Balances
Appendix-2
2.1 Testing Drugs
2.1.1- Systematic Study of Crude Drugs
2.1.2- Microscopic methods of Examining Crude Vegetable Drugs
2.1.3- Types of Stomata 
2.1.4- Determination of Stomatal Index
2.1.5-Determination of Palisade Ratio
2.1.6-Determination of Vein –Islet Number
2.1.7-Determination of Stomatal Number
2.2 Determination of Quantitative Data of Vegetable Drugas
2.2.1-Sampling of drugs
2.2.2- Foreign Matter and Determination of Foreign matter
2.2.3-Determination of Total Ash 
2.2.4-Determination of Acid Insoluble Ash 
2.2.5-Determination of Water Soluble Ash
2.2.6-Determination of Alcohol soluble Extractive
2.2.7-Determination of Water Soluble Extractive
2.2.8-Determination o of Ether Soluble Extractive (Fixed Oil Content)
2.2.9-Determination of Moisture Content (Loss on Drying)
2.2.10-Determination of Volatile Oil in Drugs
2.2.11-Special Processes used in Alkaloidal Assays
2.2.11-a-Continuous Extraction of Drugs
2.2.11-b-Tests for Complete Extraction of Alkaloids
2.2.12-Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC)
2.2.13- Starch estimation (Mont Gomery  1957)
[Spectrophotometric Method ]
2.2.14 - Sugar estimation (Mont Gomery 1957) [Spectrophotometric method]
2.2.15 - Fatty oil estimation
2.2.16 - Determination of Foaming index
2.2.17 - Protein estimation (Lowry et al, 1951)
2.2.17a - Isolation of Forskohlin (Shah et al., 1980)
2.2.18 - Method for Alkaloid estimation
vi2.3 Limit Tests
2.3.1- Limit Test for Arsenic
2.3.2-Limit Test for Chlorides
2.3.3-Limit Test for Heavy Metals
2.3.4-Limit Test for Iron 
2.3.5-Limit Test for lead
2.3.6-Sulphated Ash
2.3.7-Limit Test for Sulphates
Appendix-3
3.1 Physical Tests and determinations
2.3.1-Powder Fineness
2.3.2-Refractive Index
2.3.3-Weight per milliliter and Specific Gravity 
Appendix-4
4.1 Reagents and Solutions
Appendix-5
5.1- Weights and Measures
5.2- Approximate Equivalents of Doses in Indian System and Metric System
Appendix- 6
Classical Ayurvedic References
Index
English equivalents of Ayurvedic clinical conditions and diseases 
Monograph published Volume-I
Monographs published in Volume-II
Monographs published in Volume-III
Monographs published in Volume-IV
vii LEGAL NOTICES
In India there are laws dealing with drugs that are the subject of monographs  
which follow. These monographs should be read subject to the restrictions imposed  
by these laws wherever they are applicable.
It is expedient that enquiry be made in each case in order to ensure that the  
provisions of the law are being complied with.
In general, the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 (subsequently amended in 1964  
and 1982), the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 and the Poisons Act, 1919 and the rules  
framed thereunder should be consulted.
              Under the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India  
(A.P.I.), Part-I, Vol. II, is the book of standards for single drugs included therein and  
the standards prescribed in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, Part-I, Vol. II  
would be official. If considered necessary these standards can be amended and the  
Chairman of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee authorised to issue such  
amendments.  Whenever  such  amendments  are  issued  the  Ayurvedic  
Pharmacopoeia of India, Part-I, Vol. II, would be deemed to have been amended  
accordingly.
viiiGENERAL NOTICES
Title - The title of the book is “ Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of 
Name of the Drugs - The name given on the top of each monograph of the drug is in  
Sanskrit as mentioned in the  Ayurvedic classics and/or in the  Ayurvedic Formulary of 
India , Part-I and Part-II will be considered official. These names have been arranged in  
English alphabetical order. The Latin name (taxonomical nomenclature) of each drug as  
found  in authentic  scientific  literature has  been provided  in the monograph  in  the  
introductory paragraph. The official name will be the main title of the drug and its  
scientific name will also be considered as legal name.
Introductory Para  - Each monograph begins with an introductory paragraph indicating  
the part, scientific name of the drug in Latin with short description about its habit,  
distribution and method of collection, if any.
Synonyms - Synonyms of each drug appearing in each monograph in Sanskrit, English,  
Hindi, Urdu and other Indian regional languages have been mentioned as found in the  
classical texts,  Ayurvedic Formulary of India, Part-I and Part-II as procured from the  
experts, scholars of Ayurveda and officials in the field from different states.
Italics - Italic type has been used for scientific name of the drug appearing in the  
introductory  paragraph  of  each  monograph  as  also  for  chemicals  and  reagents,  
substances or processes described in Appendix.
Odour and Taste - Wherever a specific odour has been found it has been mentioned  
but the description as ‘ odourless’ or ‘no odour’ has in many cases been avoided in the  
description,  as large numbers of drugs have got no specific  odour. The “odour” is 
examined by directly smelling 25 g of the powdered drug contained in a package or  
freshly powdered. If the odour is discernible the sample is rapidly transferred to an open  
container and re-examined after 15 minutes. If the odour persists to be discernible, it is  
described as having odour.
The “Taste” of a drug is examined by taking a small quantity of 85 mesh powder  
by a tip of moist glass rod and applying it on tongue previously rinsed with water. This  
may not be done in case if poisonous drugs, indicated in monograph.
Mesh Number - Wherever the powdering of the drug has been required the sieve “Mesh  
Number 85” has been used. This will not apply for drugs containing much oily substance.  
Weights and Measures -  The metric system of weights and measures is employed.  
Weights are given in multiples or fractions of a gramme (g) or of a milligram (mg). Fluid  
measures are given in multiples or fractions of millilitre (ml).
When the term “drop” is used, the measurement is to be made by means of a  
tube, which delivers in 20 drops 1 gram of distilled water at 15oC.
Metric measures are required by the Pharmacopoeia to be graduated at 20oC and 
all  measurements  involved  in  the  analytical  operations  of  the  Pharmacopoeia  are  
intended, unless otherwise stated to be made at that temperature.
Identity, Purity and Strength - Under the heading “Identification” tests are provided  
as an aid to identification and are described in their respective monographs.
ixThe term “Foreign Matter” is used to designate any matter, which does not form  
part of the drug as defined in the monograph. Vegetable drugs used as such or in  
formulations, should be duly identified and authenticated and be free from insects,  
pests, fungi, micro-organisms, pesticides, and other animal matter including animal  
excreta, be within the permitted and specified limits for lead, arsenic and heavy metals,  
and  show  no  abnormal  odour,  colour,  sliminess,  mould  or  other  evidence  of  
deterioration.
The  quantitative  tests  e.g.  total  ash,  acid-insoluble  ash,  water-soluble  ash,  
alcohol-soluble extractive, water- soluble extractive, ether-soluble extractive, moisture  
content, volatile oil content and assays are the methods upon which the standards of  
Pharmacopoeia  depend.  The  methods  for  assays  are  described  in  their  respective  
monographs and for other quantitative tests, methods are not repeated in the text of  
monographs but only the corresponding reference of appropriate appendix is given. The  
analyst is not precluded from employing an alternate method in any instance if he is  
satisfied  that  the  method,  which  he  uses,  will  give  the  same  result  as  the  
Pharmacopoeial Method.  In  suitable  instances  the  methods  of  microanalysis,  if  of  
equivalent accuracy, may be substituted for the tests and assays described. However, in  
the event of doubt or dispute the methods of analysis of the Pharmacopoeia are alone  
authoritative.
Limits for Heavy Metals  – All Ayurvedic Drugs (Single/Compound formulation) must  
comply with the limits for Heavy Metals prescribed in individual Monograph and wherever  
limit is not given then they must comply with the limits given in WHO publication  
“Quality Control Methods for Medicinal Plants and Material”.
Standards - For statutory purpose, statements appearing in the API, Part-I, Vol. V,  
under Description, those of definition of the part and source plants, and Identity, Purity  
and Strength, shall constitute standards. 
Thin Layer Chromatography ( T.L.C.) - Under this head, wherever given, the number  
of spots and Rf values of the spots with their colour have been mentioned as a guide for  
identification of the drug and not as Pharmacopoeial requirement. However, the analyst  
may use any other solvent system and detecting reagent in any instance if he is satisfied  
that the method which he uses, even by applying known reference standards, will give  
better result to establish the identity of any particular chemical constituent reported to  
be present in the drug.
Quantities to be weighed for Assays and Tests - In all description quantity of the  
substance to be taken for testing is indicated. The amount stated is approximate but the  
quantity actually used must be accurately weighed and must not deviate by more than  
10 per cent from the one stated.
Constant Weight -  the term “Constant Weight” when it refers to drying or ignition  
means that two consecutive weighings do not differ by more than 1.0 mg per g of the  
substance taken for the determination, the second weighing following an additional hour  
of drying on further ignition.
Constituents - Under this head only the names of important chemical constituents,  
groups of constituents reported in research publications have been mentioned as a guide  
and not as pharmacopoeial requirement.
Percentage of Solutions -  In defining standards, the expression per cent (%), is used,  
according to circumstances, with one of the four meanings given below.
Per cent w/w (percentage weight in weight) expresses the number of grammes of 
active substance, in 100 grammes of product.        
xPer cent w/v (Percentage weight in volume) expresses the number of grammes of 
active substance in 100 millilitres of product.        
Per cent v/v (percentage volume in volume) expresses the number of millilitres of 
active substance in 100 millilitres of product.        
         Per cent v/w (percentage volume in weight) expresses the number of millilitres 
of active substance in 100 grammes of product. 
Percentage of alcohol - All statements of percentage of alcohol ( C2H5OH) refer to 
percentage by volume at 15.56 oC.        
Temperature - Unless otherwise specified all temperatures refer to centigrade ( celsius), 
thermometric scale.
Solutions - Unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph, all solutions are  
prepared with purified water.
Reagents  and  Solutions  -  The  chemicals  and  reagents  required  for  the  test  in  
Pharmacopoeia are described in Appendices.
Solubility - When stating the solubilities of Chemical substances the term “Soluble” is  
necessarily sometimes used in a general sense irrespective of concomitant chemical  
changes.
Statements of solubilities, which are expressed as a precise relation of weights of  
dissolved substance of volume of solvent, at a stated temperature, are intended to apply  
at that temperature. Statements of approximate  solubilities for which no figures are  
given, are intended to apply at ordinary room temperature.         
Pharmacopoeial chemicals when dissolved may show slight physical impurities,  
such as fragment of filter papers, fibres, and dust particles, unless excluded by definite  
tests in the individual monographs.
When the expression “parts” is used in defining the solubility of a substance, it is  
to be understood to mean that 1 gramme of a solid or 1 millilitre of a liquid is soluble in  
that number of millilitres of the solvent represented by the stated number of parts.
When  the  exact  solubility  of  pharmacopoeial substance  is  not  known,  a  
descriptive term is used to indicate its solubility. 
xiThe following table indicates the meaning of such terms :-
Descriptive terms Relative quantities of solvent  
Very soluble Less than 1 part
Freely soluble From 1 to 10 parts
Soluble From 10 to 30 parts
Sparingly soluble From 30 to 100 parts
Slightly soluble From 100 to 1000 parts
Very slightly soluble From 1000 to 10,000 parts
Practically insoluble More than 10,000 parts
Therapeutic  uses  and  important  formulations  –Therapeutic  uses and important  
formulations  mentioned  in  this  Pharmacopoeia  are,  as  provided  in  the  recognised 
Ayurvedic classics and in the Ayurvedic Formulary of India, Part –I and Part-II.
Doses – The doses mentioned in each monograph are in metric system of weights,  
which are the approximate conversions from classical weights mentioned in Ayurvedic  
texts. A conversion table is appended giving classical weights of Ayurvedic System of  
Medicine with their metric equivalents. Doses mentioned in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia  
of  India  (A.P.I.)  are  intended  merely  for  general  guidance  and  represent,  unless  
otherwise stated, the average range of quantities per dose which is generally regarded  
suitable by clinicians for adults only when administered orally.    
    
It is to be noted that the relation between doses in metric and Ayurvedic systems 
set forth in the text is of approximate equivalence. These quantities are for convenience  
of prescriber and sufficiently accurate for pharmaceutical purposes.
The abbreviations commonly employed are as follows:                                               
Abbreviations of technical terms
m. Metre
l. Litre
mm. Millimetre
cm. Centimetre
µ. Micron (0.001 mm)
Kg. Kilogram
g. Gramme
mg. Milligram
ml. Millilitre
IN. Normal solution
0.5 N. Half-normal solution
0.1 N. Decinormal solution
1M. Molar solution
Fam. Family
PS. Primary Standards
TS. Transverse Section
xiiAbbreviations used for Languages
Sansk. Sanskrit
Assam. Assamese
Beng. Bengali
Eng. English
Guj. Gujrati
Kan. Kannada
Kash. Kashmiri
Mal. Malayalam
Mar. Marathi
Ori. Oriya
Punj. Punjabi
Tam. Tamil
Tel. Telugu
ABBREVIATIONS FOR PARTS OF PLANTS
Cotyledon Cotldn.
Flower Fl.
Fruit Fr.
Heart Wood Ht. Wd.
Leaf Lf.
Pseudo-bulb Pseudo-bulb
Root Bark Rt. Bk.
Root Rt.
Rhizome Rz.
Seed Sd.
Stem Bark St. Bk.
Stem St.
Tuberous Root Tub. Rt.
Wood Wd.
Whole Plant Wh. Pl.
xiii1. Amra  Haridra (Rz) 
ËMRA HARIDRË (Rhizome) 
Ëmra  Haridr¡  consists  of  the  rhizome  of  Curcuma  amada  Roxb.  (Fam. 
Zingiberaceae), a biennial with ovoid root stock, 60 to 90 cm high, grown in W. Bengal  
and on the hills of west coast of India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Ëmr¡drakam, Ëmragandha-haridr¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Aamaa Aadaa 
English:Mango-ginger 
Gujrati  :Aambaa haldhar 
Hindi    :Aamaa-haldi, Amiyaa haldi 
Kannada:Ambarasini, Huli Arsin 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Mangayinji 
Marathi:Aambe halad, Ambaa halad 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Ambiya haladi 
Tamil   :Mankayyinji 
Telugu  :Mamidi Allamu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Rhizome laterally flattened, longitudinally wrinkled, 2 to 6 cm long, 0.5 to 2 cm  
in diameter, branched, remnant of scaly leaves arranged circularly giving the appearance  
of growth rings; cut pieces 1.5 to 3.5 cm in diameter, circular, punctate scars on the  
surface, branching sympodial, horizontal; roots long, unbranched, tapering, thread like,  
yellowish-brown; rhizome buff coloured with short and smooth fracture; odour and taste  
like raw mango.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. of rhizome circular in outline; epidermal cells rectangular-oval; cuticle thick,  
long unicellular trichomes present, storied suberized cork cells interrupted by lysigenous  
oil glands; a wide cortex having irregularly scattered vascular bundles, each vascular  
bundle with a prominent fibrous sheath; inner limit of cortex marked by endodermis  
followed  by  pericycle;  vascular  bundles  devoid  of  sheath,  arranged  in  a  ring;  
schizogenous canals and abundant oil cells with suberized walls found in cortex and in  
1central region; most of the parenchymatous cells filled with starch grains, which are  
oval-ellipsoidal, sometimes polygonal in shape, 10 to 60 µ m, simple, hilum circular or a  
2 to 5 rayed cleft, lamellae distinct and concentric; vascular bundles in the central  
cylinder are similar to those in the cortex, scattered, closed, collateral, surrounded by  
sheath of thick walled cells; secondary wall thickening reticulate; fibres thin walled  
lignified, lumen narrow. 
Powder - Powder light yellow, sweet, raw mango like odour; shows fragments of storied  
cork, xylem vessels with reticulate thickenings, lignified xylem fibres, oil cells, patches  
of parenchymatous cells filled with starch grains which are oval-ellipsoidal, sometimes  
polygonal in shape, 10 to 60 µm, simple, hilum circular or a 2 to 5 rayed cleft, lamellae  
distinct and concentric.  Powder when treated with 1N aqueous NaOH becomes green  
with yellowish tinge under UV 254 nm; with 1N HCl and nitrocellulose in amylacetate  
added one after the other, powder becomes orange in daylight.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   12   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Starch                                     Not less than     16   per cent, Appendix    2.2.13 
Essential oil                              Not less than     1    per cent, Appendix    2.2.10 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using toluene : ethyl acetate : methanol (5 : 0.5 : 0.05) shows fluorescent zones at Rf.  
0.10  (green)  and  0.34  (blue)  under  UV  (366  nm).  On  spraying  with  anisaldehyde-  
sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 1200C, spots of purple  
colour appear at Rf . 0.16, 0.32, 0.72 and 0.97.
  
CONSTITUENTS   -  Volatile oil (α-pinene,  δ-camphor),α-curcumene, 1-β curcumene, 
phytosterol.
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Sara 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pan¢, Kaphahara, Pittahara, Ruciprada, V¤Àya 
2 IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Asthisandh¡naka Lepa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  Ka¸·u, Vrana, K¡sa, áv¡sa, Hikk¡, Jvara, Abhigh¡taja áotha,  
Kar¸a¿ula, Sannip¡ta 
DOSE  -  2- 4 g. 
   
  
32. Anishuna (Fr) 
ANISÍNA (Fruit) 
Anis£na consists of dried fruit of  Pimpinella anisum  Linn. (Fam. Apiaceae); an  
annual erect plant introduced and cultivated in India at Uttar Pradesh, Orissa and Punjab.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:ávetapuÀp¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Muhuri 
English:Anise 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Badiyan Rumee, Sauph, Anisoon 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Anisuna Shopa 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Shombu 
Telugu  :-- 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
The fruits are entire cremocarp, 3 to 5 mm long and 1 to 2 mm wide, ovoid,  
generally attached with slender pedicel, stylopods with bifurcate short styles; greenish-  
yellow or greenish-brown in colour; rough to touch due to the presence of trichomes;  
primary ridges 8 to 12 in number with uniform width; odour characteristic and taste  
sweet and aromatic.
b) Microscopic 
T.S.  of  fruit  shows  single  layered  epidermis  with  small,  numerous,  conical,  
mostly unicellular, occasionally two celled, thick walled and warty trichomes, vascular  
tissues present under the ridges; about 40 vittae are present on the dorsal surface and two  
large vittae on commissural surface; a few of the vittae are branched; small patch of  
mesocarpic  stone  cells  are  present  at  the  commissural  surface;  inner  epidermis  
represented by parquetry layer consisting of tangentially elongated cells; endosperm  
exhibits thick walled parenchyma cells with numerous aleurone grains usually containing  
a minute rosette of calcium oxalate and occasionally oil globules.
4Powder -  Powder shows fragments of vascular elements with scalariform, spiral and  
reticulate thickening; striated epidermal cells with occasional anomocytic stomata, thin  
walled parenchyma cells, tangentially elongated cells of parquetry layer, thick walled  
cells of endosperm with aleurone grains containing minute rosettes of calcium oxalate  
and oil globules, scattered aleurone grains with crystals of calcium oxalate and small  
conical, unicellular, occasionally bicellular, warty trichomes; fibres, stone cells and  
vittae with underlying parquetry cells.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     30   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
ASSAY 
The drug on steam distillation yields colourless oil, not less than 1.8% v/w (Appendix  
2.2.10).
 
T.L.C. 
TLC of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plates (Merck), using Toulene : Ethyl  
acetate  (93.7)  shows  under  UV  (254nm)  five  spots  at  Rf.0.18,  0.32(both  orange),  
0.38(white), 0.44 (red), 0.88(violet); on exposure to iodine vapours four yellow spots  
appear at Rf.0.23, 0.32, 0.38 and 0.88;  on exposures to with vanillin-sulphuric acid and  
heating the plate at 110oC for 10 minutes, six violet spots appear at Rf. 0.18, 0.23, 0.32,  
0.38, 0.60 and 0.88.
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Volatile oil, fixed oils and protein.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara, V¡t¡nulomaka, RakÀoghna, Ërtavajanana 
 
5IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Br¡hm¢ Va¶¢ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  á£la, Ëdhm¡na, Kaphavik¡ra, M£tragh¡ta, B¡lagraha 
DOSE  -  1-3 g. 
        Q. S. for dh£pan¡rtha [fumigation]. 
   
  
63. Ankolaha (Lf) 
A×KOLAH (Leaf) 
A´kolah consist of dried leaf of  Alangium salviifolium  (Linn. f.) Wang. syn.  A. 
lamarckii Thw.; (Fam. Alangiaceae), a small tree found over the plains and foothills  
throughout India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Ankola, Anko¶a, Deerghakeela, Nikochaka, T¡mraphala, Gupta Sneha 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Akarkanta, Baghankura, Aankod, Angkura, Dhalakura 
English:Sage-leaved Alangium 
Gujrati  :Ankol, Onkla 
Hindi    :Ankol, Ankora, Dhera 
Kannada:Ankolimara, Ansaroli, Arinjil, Ankol 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Ankolam, Velittanti, Irinjil, Chemmaram 
Marathi:Ankola 
Oriya   :Ankul, Baghonokhiya, Dolanku, Konkonolo 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Alangi, Ankolum, Atikoevam 
Telugu  :Ankolamu, Udagu, Urgen 
Urdu    :Ankola 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaves 8 to13 cm in length and 3 to 5 cm in width, simple, petiolate, petiole 6  
to13 mm long, lanceolate, narrowly oblong or ovate, base rounded or acute, glabrous  
above, pubescent on the nerves, venation reticulate.
b) Microscopic 
Leaf -
 
Petiole - Epidermis single layered, covered by cuticle; nonglandular, mostly unicellular,  
rarely bicellular, uniseriate trichomes, measuring upto 280 µ in length and upto 16 µ in 
width; 7 to10 layered collenchyma present just beneath the epidermis, followed by  
parenchymatous tissue; collateral vascular bundles 3 to10 in number arranged in an arch  
and surrounding parenchymatous pith; vascular bundles composed of xylem and phloem;  
xylem consists of fibres, tracheids and xylem parenchyma; abundant rosette crystals of  
7calcium  oxalate  present  in  the  parenchyma  tissue,  measuring  upto  45  µ in  diam.; 
granulated pigments noticed in all tissues except in the vascular bundle.
Midrib - T.S. shows biconvex outline; epidermis on both surfaces covered by cuticle;  
abundant nonglandular, unicellular trichomes measuring upto 385 µ in length and upto  
16 µ in width present on epidermis; 4 or 5 layered collenchyma situated just beneath the  
epidermis;  collenchyma  followed  by  3  or  4  layered chlorenchyma; vascular  bundle  
surrounded by sclerenchymatous tissue except on lateral sides; phloem located on the  
outer peripheral parts of xylem; xylem mainly consists of tracheids, vessels and fibres;  
central part of the midrib occupied by parenchyma cells, containing rosettes of calcium  
oxalate crystals, measuring upto 20 µ in diam. 
Lamina - T. S. shows dorsiventral structure; epidermis on both the sides covered by  
cuticle; in surface view the lower epidermis shows straight walled, polygonal cells with  
prominent cuticular striations and anomocytic type of stomata; upper epidermis either  
devoid  of  stomata or  with rare ones; cuticular  striations  also  absent; nonglandular,  
unicellular trichomes similar to midrib abundant on lower epidermis; upper epidermis  
followed by a two layered palisade; mesophyll traversed by veins. Dispersed in the  
region are rhomboid calcium oxalate crystals, measuring 10 to 26 µ in length and 6 to 16  
µ in width; palisade ratio 7 to 11; vein islet number 8 to 12; stomatal index 7 to 14.
Powder -  Greenish brown, taste bitter; shows tracheids, vessels, lignified fibres with  
tapered ends measuring 40 to 280 µ in length and upto 20 µ in width, rosettes of calcium  
oxalate  crystals,  rhomboid  crystals,  nonglandular  unicellular  trichomes,  groups  of  
palisade  cells,  fragments  of  upper  epidermis  and  lower  epidermis  with  anomocytic  
stomata.
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
ASSAY - 
Contains not less than 0.35 per cent of alkaloid as determined by the following method :-
Soxlet extract coarsely crushed (25g) dried leaves of  A. salviifolium with n-
hexane (700 ml) for 15 hours.  Leave the exhausted (defatted) plant material to dry at  
room  temperature  and  then  extract  with  methanol  (500  ml)  for  16  hours.  Remove  
methanol under reduced pressure, acidify with 3 % acetic acid, wash with diethyl ether  
(3 x 100 ml) and make aqueous phase alkaline with 10 % aqueous sodium carbonate.  
8Extract the liberated (free) alkaloids first with dichloromethane (3 x 100 ml) and then  
with ethyl acetate (5 x 100 ml). Combine both the extracts, evaporate to dryness and  
weigh the residue as total alkaloids.
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of  the  alcoholic  extract on  silica gel  G plates  (0.2  mm  thick)  using  
toluene: ethyl acetate: diethylamine (60:30:10) shows under UV (254 nm) six spots at  
Rf. 0.12 (brown), 0.17, 0.21,0.38 (all violet), 0.60 and 0.66 (both yellowish green).  
Under UV (366 nm) eight fluorescent spots appear at Rf. 0.12, (yellow) 0.17, 0.21(both  
faint blue), 0.24 (blue), 0.30 (pink), 0.38 (blue), 0.60 and 0.66 (both pink). On exposure  
to iodine vapour nine spots appear at Rf. 0.12, 0.17, 0.21 (all yellowish brown), 0.24  
(reddish brown), 0.30, 0.38, 0.50 (all yellowish brown), 0.60 and 0.66 (both green). On  
spraying with Dragendorff's reagent six orange spots appear at  Rf. 0.17, 0.21, 0.24,  
0.30, 0.38, 0.50. 
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   Alkaloids  (Alangimarckine,  deoxytubulosine,  ankorine);  
campesterol,  episterol,  stigmast-5,22,25-trien-3  β-ol, 
alangidiol and isoalangidiol. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Sara, Snigdha, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara,  V¡tahara,  V¡maka,  Recaka,  Vra¸a¿odhaka,  M£trala,  
P¡rada áodhra, Jvarghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  (No formulations) 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  Graha B¡dh¡, JantuviÀa, Jvara, K¤mi, KukkuraviÀa, L£t¡viÀa,  
Raktavik¡ra, Sopha, ViÀrik¡ra, Visarpa, MatsyaviÀa, Amav¡ta,  
Ka¸tharoga, Sotha, S£la, MuÀakaviÀa 
DOSE  -  2-10 g. 
   
  
94. Aragvadha (St.Bk) 
ËRAGVËDHA(Stem bark) 
Ëragv¡dha consists of stem bark of Cassia fistula Linn. (Fam. Fabaceae), a medium  
sized deciduous tree, 6 to 9 m tall with bright yellow flowers in long pendulous racemes,  
and long cylindrical blackish-brown pods of 25 to 50 cm in length and upto 3 cm in width;  
found wild and also commonly planted as ornamental tree in most parts of the country up  
to an altitude of 1200 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:K¤tam¡la, Vy¡dhigh¡ta, áamp¡ka, áamy¡ka, Ûrpadruma, K¤tam¡laka,  
R¡jav¤kÀa. 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Sondaalee, Sonaalu 
English:Indian Laburnum, Purging Fistula, Pudding pipe tree 
Gujrati  :Garmaalo 
Hindi    :Amaltaas, Girimaal 
Kannada:Kakke, Kakkemar 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Konna 
Marathi:Baahvaa 
Oriya   :Sunaari 
Punjabi:Amaltaas, Kaniyaar, Girdnalee 
Tamil   :Konnai 
Telugu  :Rela 
Urdu    :Amaltaas 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug occurs in flat or curved thick pieces; outer surface smooth to rough with  
warty patches; greenish-grey to red; inner surface rough, reddish with parallel striations;  
fracture, laminate; odour, sweet and characteristic; taste, astringent.
b) Microscopic 
Stem bark shows 5 to 8 layers of cork, composed of square to rectangular cells;  
cortex many layered, outer consisting of rectangular cells, middle tangentially elongated  
cells and inner of polygonal cells; groups of stone cells, oval to elongated arranged  
tangentially forming a continuous or discontinuous band; fibres present in groups in rest  
of the cortex; phloem shows sieve elements, phloem parenchyma and bast fibres in  
patches, traversed by uni to triseriate medullary rays of radially elongated oval cells;  
10phloem parenchyma of rectangular to polygonal thin walled cells; bast fibres moderately  
thick walled, lignified, in groups surrounded by crystal fibres; abundant isolated calcium  
oxalate prism crystals present also in cells of outer cortex and inner cortex; starch grains  
mostly simple, but a few with 2 or 3 components in phloem parenchyma.
Powder -Light brown; shows thin walled parenchymatous cells; numerous bundles of  
lignified  fibres  associated  with  crystal  fibres;  sieve  tubes,  many,  well-developed;  
numerous stone cells, thick walled, lumen nearly absent; abundant prismatic crystals of  
calcium oxalate mostly present singly in a cell and also as numerous crystal fibres;  
starch grains mostly simple, 2 or 3 in compound grains, hilum inconspicuous.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   13   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     25   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     18   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the diethyl ether extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using petroleum ether : ethyl acetate : formic acid (15:2.5:0.2) showed spots at Rf 0.19,  
0.28, 0.54 and 0.72 (all pink)  on spraying with vanillin-sulphuric acid reagent and  
heating the plate at 105oC for about ten minutes.
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Anthraquinones, tannins, sterols. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Pittahara, V¡tahara, KoÀtha¿uddhikara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Avittoladi Bhasma KÀ¡ra, M¡nasamitra Va¶aka 
 
11THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   á£la,  Aruci,  Gulma,  Jvara,  K¤mi,  Raktapitta,  Ga¸·am¡l¡,  
UpadaÆsa, KuÀ¶ha, Vibandha, K¡mal¡, H¤droga, V¡tarakta,  
áotha,  M£trak¤cchra,  D¡ha,  Udaravik¡ra,  Prameha,  Vra¸a,  
Ka¸du, Grahan¢, A¿mar¢. 
DOSE  -  50 - 100 ml kv¡tha. 
   
  
125. Asphota (Rt) 
ËSPHOÙË (Root) 
Ëspho¶¡  consists  of  the  dried  root  pieces  of  Vallaris  solanacea  Kuntze  syn. 
V.heynei Spreng. (Fam. Apocynaceae), a large woody climbing shrub, occurring wild in  
subtropical Himalayan forests, up to an altitude of 1500 m and on the Konkan coast and  
further south; often cultivated in the gardens as an ornamental plant due to its fragrant  
white flowers.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Bhadravall¢, Ëspho¶¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Haaparmaali 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Dudhibel 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:-- 
Oriya   :Bonokonerinoi, Haporomoli 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :-- 
Telugu  :Nagamalle, Nityamalle 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
The dried, young and old root pieces are light, tough, cylindrical, tortuous and  
rarely branched. Young root about 5 to 6 cm. in length and about 1 to 2 cm. in diameter,  
surface smooth to faintly longitudinally wrinkled, with transversely elongated lenticels,  
cracks and exfoliation at places exposing the inner wood, buff to greyish externally, pale  
yellowish brown internally.
Old root pieces are about 5 to 12 cm. in length and 3 to 8 cm. in diameter, surface  
very rough, knotty, longitudinally fissured, furrowed, cracked, prominent rootlet scars  
present, small rounded protuberances encircle the lenticels and exfoliation; earthy brown  
to grey externally, pale brown internally; transversely cut surface shows brown coloured  
outer bark, colourless, papery, thin inner bark and a wide zone of pale brown central  
13wood, occupying the major area of the root; odour slightly aromatic and irritant; taste,  
bitter.
b) Microscopic 
Cork many layered, outer one lignified, inner few layers suberised, cork cambium  
distinct  2  to  3  layered,  cortex  narrow  in  young  root  and  compressed  in  old;  
parenchymatous, filled with cluster crystals of calcium oxalate and simple as well as  
compound starch grains; pericycle is characterised by the presence of isolated groups of  
small, thick walled, lignified fibres; phloem many layered, characterised by two distinct  
zones, cells of the outer one filled with yellowish brown contents, the inner narrow zone  
is devoid of this; medullary rays mostly uniseriate, rarely bi to fourseriate, narrow,  
almost running  parallel to each other  but becoming wavy in the outer phloem  and  
abruptly getting broad at its extremities especially in case of old roots; sieve tubes,  
companion  cells  and  phloem  parenchyma  distinct,  all  parenchymatous  cells  of  the  
phloem including medullary ray cells are filled with abundant clusters and a few prisms  
of calcium oxalate crystals and starch grains, microclusters of calcium oxalates arranged  
in rows form the characteristic feature of the phloem;  thick walled, circular latex cells,  
rectangular,  tangentially  elongated  oil  channels  filled  with  oil  globules  traverse  
throughout the phloem; a few thick walled, lignified, pitted stone cells are located  
especially in the old roots; cambium distinct, continuous; xylem very wide, lignified  
consisting of mostly isolated xylem vessels and tracheids, both border - pitted;  fibers  
thin walled; parenchyma and medullarly rays pitted,  containing starch grains.  
Powder - Under the microscope it exhibits polygonal lignified cork cells in surface view,  
parenchymatous cells of the cortex and the phloem cells with starch grains and calicum  
oxalate cluster crystals, pitted xylem vessels and tracheids, lignified pitted medullary  
rays cells; occasionally groups of lignified thick walled, pitted stone cells and thin  
walled xylem fibres with wide lumen are also seen.  
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.7  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     11   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick) using chloroform :  
methanol (9:1) under UV (254 nm) shows prominent spots at Rf.  0.51, 0.62, 0.68, 0.76  
(all dark spot) and 0.96 (blue fluorescence). On exposure to iodine vapour spots appear  
at Rf.  0.12, 0.19, 0.29, 0.44, 0.50, 0.67, 0.80 and 0.95.
14 CONSTITUENTS  -   
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :V¡tahara, Vra¸a¿odhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Vajraka Taila, Abhay¡ Lava¸ 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   á£la,  áv¡sa,  KuÀ¶ha,  Vra¸a,  A¿mar¢,  M£trakrcchra,  P
£tan¡grahavista (B¡laroga), Graha¸¢, M£saka ViÀavik¡ra,  
Ar¿a 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
156. Bastantri (Rt.) 
BASTËNTRÌ(Root) 
Bast¡ntr¢ consist of dried root of Argyreia nervosa (Burm.f.) Boj. syn. A. speciosa 
Sweet. (Fam. Convolvulaceae), a woody climber with stout stems, extensively planted in  
garden along trellises and walls and also found wild as an escape.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Vr·dhad¡ru, Antaha Ko¶arapuÀp¢, Ch¡gal¡ntr¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Bijataadaka, Bridhadarak 
English:Elephant Creeper 
Gujrati  :Samudara Sosha, Varadhaaro, Shamadrasosh 
Hindi    :Samandar-kaa-paat, Samundarsosh, Ghaavapattaa, Vidhaaraa 
Kannada:Samudrapala, Samudraballi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Samudra Pacchha, Samudra-Pala, Marikkunn Marututari 
Marathi:Samudrashok 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Samudrappachai 
Telugu  :Samudrapaala 
Urdu    :Samandarotha 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Roots  of  varying  sizes  and  thickness,  thin  pieces  show  somewhat  smooth  
brownish  exterior,  thick  pieces  tough  and  woody,  light  brown  in  colour,  rough,  
longitudinally striated, lenticellate and with circular root scars; fracture fibrous; rootlets  
and branches, thin and somewhat fibrous; odour, nil; taste, pungent, bitter and astringent.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. comprises of 6 to 9 layers of cork cells, a single layer of phellogen and  
usually  10  to  12  layers  of  phelloderm;  cortical  cells  thin  walled  and  tangentially  
elongated, containing circular starch grains, rosette crystals of calcium oxalate found  
scattered; a wide zone of secondary phloem consisting of sieve tubes, companion cells  
and phloem parenchyma present, traversed by medullary rays containing circular starch  
grains; resin canals present; secondary xylem a wide zone comprising of xylem vessels,  
tracheids, fibre-tracheids and fibres. 
16Powder -  Creamish brown when fresh turning greyish brown on storage; shows under  
microscope, cortical cells parenchymatous filled with circular starch grain measuring  
between 3 to 16 µ in diameter; brown colouring matter and rosette crys tals of calcium 
oxalate present; vessels, tracheids, xylem parenchyma, fibres and fibre tracheids present;  
vessels, drum shaped, pitted with large end perforations; tracheids, much longer than  
wide with bordered pits; fibres having pointed ends; fibre tracheids, having blunt ends  
and a few oblique pits.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.8  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of methanolic extract of the roots on precoated silica gel G plate using  
methanol - chloroform (20 : 80) showed a blue fluorescent spot under UV (365nm) along  
with number of other spots of very weak intensity. Due to the presence of very negligible  
amount of alkaloids in the roots these could not be isolated. However, methanolic extract  
of A. nervosa seeds was prepared and T.L.C. compared with A. nervosa roots extract. 
The T.L.C. pattern of root and seed extracts (prepared in methanol) was similar although  
the intensity of spots in case of root extracts was very poor.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Balya,  Adhobh¡gahara,  Agnikara,  Asthisandh¡na  K¡r¢,  Ëyurv
¤dhikara,  K¡ntikara,  Ka¸thya,  Kaphav¡tahara,  Medhya,  Ras¡yana,  
Rucya, Svarya, V¤Àya, ViÀaghna. 
 
17IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Mi¿raka Sneha 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   á£la,  áopha,  Apasm¡ra,  Ar¿a,  Aruci,  Ëmavata,  Ën¡ha,  
Graharb¡dh¡,  Gulma,  H¤druj¡,  K¡sa,  K¤mi,  M£trakrcha,  
Meha,  P¡¸du,  Raktapitta,  Ud¡varta,  Udara,  Unm¡da,  
V¡tarakta, Vis£c¢, V¡taruj¡, V¡t¡r¿a, Svayathu, KÀaya, Prat
¢tum, ál¢pada 
DOSE  -  3-5 g. 
   
  
187. Bhurjaha (St.Bk) 
BHURJAH (Stem Bark) 
Bhurjah consists of the stem bark of  Betula utilis  D.Don syn.  B.bhojpattra  Wall. 
(Fam.  Betulaceae),  a  moderate  sized  tree,  usually  with  a  somewhat  irregular  bole;  
occasionally a mere shrub, forming the upper limit of forest vegetation, found throughout  
the main Himalayan range ascending to an altitude of 4200 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Bhurja  Patrah,  M¤ducchada,  Bahulavalkala,  Bh£rjagranathi,  Carm¢,  
Lekhyapatrakah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Bhoojpatra, Bhujipatra 
English:Himalayan Silver Birch 
Gujrati  :Bhojpatra 
Hindi    :Bhojapatra 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Bhurjamaram 
Marathi:Bhoorjapatra 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Bhojapatram 
Telugu  :Bhurjapatri 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Broad, horizontal paper like strips, flaps or flakes of varying sizes or loosely  
laminated exfoliating pieces of bark; outer surface smooth silver grey or creamish-
yellow with brown streaks; inner surface shining, reddish  brown in colour, slightly  
wrinkled, more often devoid of markings; odour, slightly terbinthene; taste-none.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows rectangular cells, 6 to 9 layers of thin walled parenchymatous cells,  
containing prismatic calcium oxalate crystals.
Powder -  Light brown; parenchymatous cells, with a few prismatic calcium oxalate  
crystals present.
19IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   2.1  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.1  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     19   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     0.8  per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of chloroform extract of the drug on a precoated silica gel G plate using n-
hexane : ethyl acetate (9:1), on spraying with Liberman-Burchard reagent and heating  
the plate for about 5 minutes at 110oC, three spots appear at Rf . 0.31 (blackish-grey),  
0.62  (dark pink) and 0.54 (light pink) and were comparable to the spots of betulin,  
lupeol and 3 β-acetoxy-12-oleanen-28-oic acid respectively.
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Betulin, lupeol and 3 β - aetoxy - 12 - oleanen - 28 - oic acid.
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :TridoÀa¿amana,  Bh£taraks¡kara,  ViÀaghna,  Balya,  áleÀmahara,  
Medohara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Ayaskrti 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   B¡lagraha,  Raktapitta,  Vra¸a,  Kar¸aroga,  KuÀ¶haroga,  
RakÀoghnadh£pana,  Apar¡p¡tana,  Garbhasa´ga,  
Granthivisarpa 
DOSE  -  1-3 g. 
   
  
208. Canda (Rt)  
CAÛÚË (Root) 
Ca¸·¡ consists of dried root of Angelica archangelica Linn. (Fam. Apiaceae), a tall  
perennial  herb  with  thick  hollow  stem  bearing  large  bipinnate  leaves  and  umbels of  
greenish-white flowers; found wild in inner valleys of Himalayas viz. Kashmir, Chamba,  
Kullu, Pangi, Lahaul and Kinnaur at altitudes between 3200 and 4200 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Laghu Coraka 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Choraka bheda, Dudhachoraa 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:-- 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :-- 
Telugu  :-- 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Tap root thick, twisted, fleshy, highly aromatic with numerous rootlets, greyish in  
colour; odour, musk-like; taste, sweet.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows periderm composed of 5 to 9 layers of cork, followed by a layer of  
phellogen and a few layers of phelloderm, cork cells rectangu lar; cortex composed of  
thin  walled  parenchymatous  cells,  irregular  in  shape  with  intercellular  spaces  and  
contain abundant starch grains; numerous oleo-resin cells filled with oil globules are  
present, which, in mature roots may degenerate and form irregular cavities; vascular  
region and cortex traversed by biseriate medullary rays, containing circular starch grains,  
measuring usually upto 24 µ but some upto 65 µ in length and 45 µ in breadth;  phloem  
a  wide  zone  composed  of  sieve  tubes,  companion  cells,  phloem  parenchyma  and  
medullary rays; schizogenous oleo-resin cells lined by epithelium containing yellowish  
21brown substances present in this zone; cambium  very distinct consisting of 4 to 8 layers;  
xylem consists of vessels and tracheids.
Powder - Creamish yellow; shows under microscope drum shaped vessels with reticulate  
thickenings, tracheids elongated with pointed ends having reticulate thick enings; fibres 
narrow elongated with pointed ends; circular starch grains present.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2.0  per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.2  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Volatile oil                           Not less than     0.3  per cent, Appendix    2.2.10 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract of the roots on precoated silica gel 'G' plates,  
using methanol : chloroform (2:98) as the mobile phase, on spraying with 2% vanillin in  
sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for five minutes at 110oC showed on orange  
brown spot at Rf.0.37 (comparable to the spot of selimone) and a greyish blue spot at Rf.
0.68 (comparable to the spot of archangelin).
 
 CONSTITUENTS   -   Containing  limonene,  á-phellandrene,  pinene,  p-cymene,  
terpinolene,  myrcene,  fenchone,  linalool,  á-terpineol, 
cadinene,  borneol,  â-caryophyllene,  bisabolol,  angelica  
lactone,  and  other  mono  and  sesquiterpenes.  Other  
constituents include selimone, archangelin, oxypeucedanin.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara, M£trala, V¡tahara, ViÀaghna, áv¡sahara, Var¸apras¡daka,  
Svedaghna, Ka¸·£ghna, Daurgandhahara 
 
22IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Maµjisth¡di Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Apasm¡ra, áv¡sa, Hikk¡, Ka¸·u, Arsa, Pidak¡, Ko¶ha, áotha 
DOSE  -  1-3 g.   
   
  
239. Corakaha(Rt & Rt.Stock) 
CORAKAH (Root Sock) 
Corakah consists of dried mature root and root stock of  Angelica glauca  Edgw. 
(Fam. Apiaceae), a glabrous herb, upto 1.5 m tall, stem erect, grooved and fistular with  
pinnately divided leaves having compound umbels of white or purple flowers, found in  
temperate north-west Himalayas.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Taskarah, Ksemakah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Chorak 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Chorak 
Hindi    :Choraa, Gandrayan, Rikha Choraa 
Kannada:Choraka 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Choraka Pullu 
Marathi:Corak 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Choraa, Churaa 
Tamil   :-- 
Telugu  :Gaddi Davanamu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root stock : Small, thick pieces, 5 to 15 cm long and 1 to 3 cm in thickness; yellowish to  
grey in colour, rough due to the presence of deep furrows and longitudinal wrinkles;  
frequently  crowned  with  leaf  or  stem  base;  fracture,  hard  and  fibrous;  odour  
characteristically aromatic; taste, sweet with a bitter after effect and pungent aromatic  
flavour.
Root : Small pieces of 5 to 20 mm in thickness, externally grayish-brown and spongy;  
surface rough due to longitudinal wrinkles, furrows and transverse cracks;  internally it  
shows a yellow porous radiating wood surrounded by dark brown cork; fracture short,  
smooth  and  the  fractured  surface  shows  bark  with  numerous  radially  arranged  
schizogenous oleo-resin cavities with brown or yellow content.
 
24b) Microscopic 
Root stock : T.S. shows 6 to 10 layered cork of tangentially elongated cells, followed by  
3 or 4 layers of phellogen and a wide zone of phelloderm consisting of thin walled  
parenchyma in which schizogenous cavities present; phloem, cone shaped, traversed by  
parenchymatous medullary rays filled with circular starch grains measuring between 3  
and  23  µ in  diameter;  numerous  schizogenous  oleo-resin  cells   present;  cambium  
present; xylem arranged in concentric layers and consists of vessels, tracheids, fibres and  
xylem  parenchyma  and  traversed  by  medullary  rays;  pith  consists  of  thin  walled  
parenchymatous tissue in which schizogenous oleo-resin cavities, filled with yellowish  
contents of resin are present.
Root : T.S. shows periderm consisting of 5 to 8 layers of thin walled yellowish - brown  
cork, a layer of phellogen and phelloderm, composed of thin-walled parenchyma cells,  
irregular  in  shape  with  intercellular  space  and  containing  abundant  starch  grains  
measuring upto 20 µ in diameter;  some of these cells disintegrate in the mature roots  
and give rise to some irregular cavities; schizogenous type of oleo-resin cavities in this  
region contain oil globules and resin; phloem a wide zone and traversed  by medullary  
rays, consisting of phloem parenchyma, sieve tubes and companion cells; numerous  
radially  arranged  schizogenous  oleo-resin  cavities  present  in   phloem  parenchyma,  
containing yellowish or yellowish-brown contents; cambium present; xylem diarch and  
radiating wood traversed by parenchymatous, multiseriate medullary rays filled with  
starch grains measuring upto 20 µ in diameter; wood consists of vessels, tracheids, wood  
parenchyma and wood fibres; vessels large, drum - shaped or elongated, reticulately  
thickened having oblique or transverse perforation.
Powder - Yellowish - brown, shows under microscope, parenchymatous cells filled with  
yellow or reddish-brown colouring matter and oil globules; schizogenous cavities and  
vessels with reticulate thickenings present; starch grains simple, oval to circular, upto  
25µ approximately.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     30   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Volatile oil                           Not less than     0.4  per cent, Appendix    2.2.10 
 
25T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of essential oil of the drug on precoated silica gel G plate using ethyl  
acetate : hexane (3:97) shows under UV light (365 nm) four spots at Rf. 0.48, 0.40 &  
0.29  (yellowish  blue  fluoresence)  and  0.25  (blue  fluoresence).  On  spraying  with  
dragendroff's reagent two spots at Rf. 0.48 and 0.40 appeared as orange coloured. On  
spraying with 2% vanillin-sulphuric acid appears four spots at Rf 0.48 & 0.40 (greyish-
purple), 0.29 (cremish) and 0.25 (pinkish-purple).
The methanol extract of the drug on precoated silica gel G plate, using methanol-
chloroform (2: 98) shows one spot at Rf. 0.71, and ethyl acetate : hexane (5:95) appear  
single  spot  at  Rf.  0.21  (yellowish-blue  colour)  under  UV  light  (365  nm)  and  was  
comparable to the spot of oxypeucedanin.
 
 
CONSTITUENTS   -   Oxypeucedanin,  3-butylidene  phthalide,  3-butylidene  
dihydrophthalide [(E-and (Z)-ligustilide] and dimers of butyl  
phthalides [angiolide, angelicolide].
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara,  Medohara,  V¡maka,  V¡tahara,  Svedahara,  H¤dya,  
Sajµasth¡pana, D¢pana, P¡cana, Vranapras¡dana 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -   Gud£cy¡di  Modaka,  Bal¡svagandhal¡kÀ¡di  Taila,  
Mah¡n¡r¡ya¸a Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Apasm¡ra, áv¡sa, Hikk¡, Jvara, Ka¸·u, Ko¶ha, KuÀ¶ha, Unm¡da,  
Vra¸a,  Pi¶ik¡,  ViÀaroga,  RaktadoÀa,  Agnim¡ndya,  áirah  á£la,  
Prati¿y¡ya, á¢tajvara, B¡laroga 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
2610. Darbha (Rt) 
DARBHA (Root) 
Darbha consists of root of  Imperata cylindrica  (Linn.) Beauv. (Fam. Poaceae), a  
perennial, erect, 30 to 90 cm tall tufted grass, distributed in the hotter parts of India from  
Punjab southwards.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Yajµmula, Ulu, Kutuka, Kharadarbha, áv®tadarbha 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Ulu 
English:Thatch grass, Cogon grass 
Gujrati  :Daabhdo, Darabh 
Hindi    :Daabha, Siru, Ulu 
Kannada:Sanna dabbac hullu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Vidulam 
Marathi:Darsnaa, Dhub 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Daaba, Sil 
Tamil   :Darbhaipul, Nanal 
Telugu  :Darbalu, Darbha gaddi, Modewa gaddi 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
The roots are fibrous, upto 2 mm. in diameter, arising from the nodes of stolons;  
surface uneven,  with  fine  wrinkles,  light  brown  to  dark  brown  in  colour;  fracture,  
fibrous; taste and odour-indistinct.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows single layered epidermis with a few long root hairs, followed by  
cortex which can be differentiated into outer and inner regions; outer cortex represented  
by 3 to 5 layers of circular to oval-shaped thin walled parenchyma cells; inner cortical  
region  exhibits  numerous  air  cavities  lined  by  thin  walled  radially  elongated  
parenchymatous cells forming the trabeculae; the central region of the root exhibits a  
typical  monocotyledonous  structure  having  10  to  15  bundles  of  xylem  elements  
alternating with small patches of phloem and surrounded by rings of endodermis and  
pericycle; except those of phloem elements all the cells from metaxylem to pericycle  
region are thick walled and lignified; the centre of the vascular cylinder is occupied by  
27pith  consisting  of  thin  walled  parenchymatous  cells;  the  vessels  are  border  pitted;  
tracheids exhibit bordered pits as well as reticulate thickening; parenchyma of vascular  
region are pitted and fibres are thick walled with pointed to tapering ends.
Powder - The powder exhibits fragments of hairs, thin walled parenchyma cells, thick  
walled fibres with tapering or pointed ends; border pitted vessels, elongated tracheids  
with  tapering  to  blunt  ends  exhibiting  reticulate  thickening  or  bordered  pits  and  
rectangular, thick walled, pitted parenchyma cells.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
TLC  of  alcoholic  extract  on  pre-coated  Silica  'G' plates  (Merck),  using  
Chloroform: Toulene:Ethanol:Acetic : Water (22:8:1:0.5:1, lower phase), shows under  
U.V. (254 nm) two white fluorescent spots at Rf.0.72 and 0.42; on exposure to iodine  
vapours  six  spots  appear  at  Rf.  0.94,  0.85,  0.72,  0.45,  0.39  (all  yellow)  and  0.36  
(orange); after spraying with 5% ethanolic-sulphuric acid and heating the plate at 1100C 
for 30 minutes, ten  spots appear at Rf. 0.94 (dark brown), 0.85 (light brown), 0.76 (faint  
brown),  0.72  (brown),  0.52  (light  brown),  0.45  (light  brown),  0.39  (violet),  0.36  
(yellow), 0.26 (orange) and 0.21 (faint brown).
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Contains five triterpenoids viz. cylindrin, arundoin, fernenon,  
isoburneol and simiarenol.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :Ras¡yana,  V¡maka,  TridaÀahara,  M£travirecan¢ya,  Stanyajanana,  
Pip¡s¡hara, KuÀthaghna, D¡hapra¿amana, 
 
28IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Karp£r¡dy¡rka, Br¡hmaras¡yana, Traika¸¶aka Gh¤ta,  
Sukum¡ra Gh¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  A¿mar¢, D¡ha, Jvara, M£tragh¡ta, M£trak¤cchra, Raktapitta,  
Visarpa,  Basti¿£la,  T¤À¡,  Raktapradara,  Rakt¡rsa,  Pradara,  
PittabhiÀyanda 
DOSE  -  10-20 g for decoction. 
   
  
2911. Dhanvayasah (Wh/Pl) 
DHANVAYËSAH (Whole Plant) 
Dhanvay¡sah consists of dried whole plant of Fagonia cretica Linn. syn. F. arabica 
Linn., F. bruguieri DC. (Fam. Zygophyllaceae), a small spiny under shrub with stiff, more  
or less prostrate branches found in north-west India and Deccan.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Duhspar¿¡,  Dur¡lambh¡,  Dhanvy¡sakah,  Virup¡,  Dur¡labh¡,  
UÀ¶rabhakÀy¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Duralabha 
English:Khorasan thorn 
Gujrati  :Dhamaaso 
Hindi    :Damahan, Dhamaasa, Hinguaa, Dhanhare 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kodittuva 
Marathi:Dhamaasaa 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Dama, Dhamah, Dhamaha 
Tamil   :Tulganari 
Telugu  :Chittigava, Gilaregati 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root -  Tap root externally brownish green, rough, with longitudinal striations, core  
yellowish-green; fracture, fibrous.
Stem - Stem pieces 0.5 to 1.5 cm thick, of variable lengths; young green, mature brown;  
spiny, two pairs of spines present at each node, spines sharp, slender, 1.5 to 2 cm in  
length; external surface of stem green, whitish brown when dry, striated; transversely  
smoothened surface showing a thin bark and prominent wood, bark peeling from stem;  
fracture, short. 
Leaf - Small, subsessile, linear, oblong, leaflets entire, green or blackish brown, 0.5 to  
1.5 cm in length and 0.05 to 0.1 cm in width, without any prominent midrib region  
projected above the level of lamina.
30Flower - Flowers small, pale rose or purple, pedicels slender, 6 to 12 mm long; sepals 3  
to 4 mm long, ovate, aristate; petals twice as long as the sepals, spathulate, claw long;  
ovary hairy, style tapering. 
Fruit - Pentagonous schizocarp, composed of five compressed, two valved cocci.
b) Microscopic 
Root  -  T.S.  shows  outermost  cork  represented  by  4  or  5  layers  of  small,  narrow,  
tangentially  elongated  cells;  phelloderm  composed  of  6  to  10  layers  of  somewhat  
tangentially elongated, thin walled parenchymatous cells, some cells having rhomboid  
crystals of calcium oxalate measuring 10 to 15 µ in length and 8 to 10 µ in width; outer 
part of secondary phloem characterised by the presence of abundant, but small patches of  
2 or 3 thick walled phloem fibres; wood composed of vessels, xylem fibres and traversed  
by 1 to 3 seriate medullary rays; vessels arranged in singles or doubles; fibres long, thick  
walled with tapering ends and measuring upto 500 µ in length and about 25 µ in width.
 
Stem  -  T.S. shows more or less circular outline; single layered epidermis with thick  
cuticle; unicellular trichomes occasionally present; cortex consisting of 7 to 10 layers of  
parenchymatous  cells showing  large patches of  fibres; sclereids with narrow lumen  
occurring singly or in groups in the cortex, measuring upto 50  µ in diam.; several  
cortical cells contain tannins; secondary phloem consisting of thin walled cells; vascular  
cambium  composed  of  3  to  4  layers  of  thin  walled  tangentially  elongated  cells;  
secondary xylem composed of fibres, tracheids, vessels, xylem parenchyma; fibres long,  
thick walled with tapering ends and measuring  260 to 950 µ in length and upto 20 µ in 
width; medullary rays mostly uniseriate or sometimes biseriate; pith composed of large  
thin  walled parenchymatous  cells, some  cells  containing  tannins;  rhomboid  crystals  
measuring 18 to 30 µ in length and 12 to 20 µ in width present in cortex and pith.
Leaf  - Isobilateral; single layered epidermis consisting of mostly tangentially elongated  
cells covered with thick cuticle. In surface view both upper and lower epidermii show  
anomocytic type of stomata, epidermal cells polygonal in shape; 2 or 3 layered palisade  
cells present on both the sides, adjacent to the epidermis; vascular bundles show xylem  
towards lower side and phloem towards upper side; sclerenchyma tissue occur as a  
bundle cap just above the phloem; small lateral vascular bundles also present in lamina;  
vein-islet number 11 to14; stomatal index 16 to 17 on lower epidermis and 5 to 7 on  
upper epidermis; palisade ratio 2 or 3 on upper epidermis and 2 to 4 on lower epidermis.
Powder Yellowish-white, bitter taste, showing groups of fibres, bordered pitted vessels,  
fragments of palisade tissue, sclereids, rhomboid crystals of calcium oxalate, cork cells,  
and  unicellular  glandular  and  nonglandular  trichomes  (both  from  fruit  epicarp),  
epidermal  cells  (cubical,  rectangular  or  polygonal)  with  slightly  wavy  walls  and  
anomocytic stomata.
31IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.4  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on silica gel 'G' plates (0.2 mm thick) using  
chloroform : methanol: acetic acid (70:30:0.2) shows under UV (254 nm) four spots at  
Rf. 0.14, 0.32, 0.46 (all violet) and 0.72 (yellowish green). Under UV (366nm) six  
fluorescent spots appear at Rf. 0.14, 0.32 (both brown), 0.39, 0.51, 0.61 and 0.72 (all  
pink). On exposure to iodine vapour nine spots appear at Rf. 0.14, 0.19, 0.28, 0.35 (all  
yellow), 0.46 (faint orange), 0.51, 0.61 and 0.72 (all yellow). On spraying with vanillin  
sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 110oC for 10 min. ten spots appear at Rf.  
0.06 (bluish grey), 0.14 (violet), 0.19 (brown), 0.28 (violet), 0.35 (brown), 0.39 (violet),  
0.46 (brown), 0.51 (violet), 0.61 (brown) and 0.72 (violet).
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   Alkaloids  (Harmine);  amino  acids  (alanine,  glycine,  leucine,  
arginine isoleucine, lysine, phenylalanine, proline, tyrosine and  
valline); terpenoids of oleanane group.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Sara 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :Kaphahara, Medohara, Pittahara, V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   -  Dur¡labh¡di Kv¡tha, Dur¡labh¡di KaÀ¡ya, R¡sn¡di  
Kv¡tha  C£r¸a  (Mah¡),  Tiktaka  Gh¤ta,  Us¢r¡sava,  
Ka¸¶akary¡valeha,  Mah¡pancagavya  Gh¤ta,  Da¿am
£l¡riÀ¶a, Punarnav¡sava 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  D¡ha, Graha¸¢, Gulma, Jvara, K¡sa, KuÀ¶ha, Prameha, Raktapitta,  
V¡tarakta, Visarpa, Atis¡ra, ViÀamajvara, T¤À¸¡, Moha, Murcch¡,  
Madaroga, Raktavik¡ra, Bharama, Chrdi, M£trghata. 
DOSE  -  5-10 g powder,  
        40-80 ml ph¡¸¶a. 
   
3212. Dravanti (Sd) 
DRAVANTÌ(Seed) 
Dravant¢ is the dried seeds of Jatropha glandulifera Roxb. (Fam. Euphorbiaceae),  
an evergreen shrub with stout branches and a smooth papery bark, found mostly in the  
black cotton soil of Deccan but also found in plains of northern India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:B¤haddant¢, Vy¡ghraira¸·a, Putra¿re¸¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:Purging nut 
Gujrati  :Ratanjota 
Hindi    :Laal Bagharend, Jangali erandi 
Kannada:Erandane danti, Totla 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Katalaavanakku 
Marathi:Thoradanti, Mogali eranda 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Kattamanakku, Adalai 
Telugu  :Adavi Amadam, Vatti amudamu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds 6 mm long, 4 mm broad and 2 to 3 mm thick, ellipsoid, oblong, light brown  
in colour, surface smooth with median sutures on both sides, with a small hard brownish  
white and minutely lobed caruncle round the micropyle, weight of 100 seeds are 1to 2 g.  
b) Microscopic 
Subtrigonous to oval in transverse section; outer epidermis of testa single layered,  
thick  walled,  pitted  narrow  columnar  cells  with  dark  brown  contents;  mesophyll  
parenchymatous  with  intercellular  spaces  and  schizogenous  latex  tubes;  the  inner  
epidermis has short palisade of narrow thin walled cells, tegmen 16 to 20 cells thick, the  
outer layer straight or curving, malphighian cells 2 or 3 with finely pitted yellowish  
brown walls followed by reddish-brown elongated single celled sclereids; the lower layer  
consists of large parenchymatous cells 12 to 16 layers deep with the inner cells radially  
elongated and crushed; inner epidermis not characteristic; endosperm composed of cells  
filled with starch grains and oil globules, starch grains spherical to oval, 5-20  µm in 
33diameter, simple, hilum circular or indistinct, crescent shaped leucoplast at one side of  
the grains, lamellae indistinct. 
Powder  - Powder of seeds creamish-brown, mucilagenous in taste without any odour,  
shows the presence of parenchymatous patches; cells filled with starch, spherical to oval,  
5 to 20 µm in diameter, simple, hilum circular or indistinct; lamellae indistinct; sclereids  
upto 160 µ long and 30 µ broad, oil globules, laticifers, vessels, elongated thick walled  
palisade cell, malphighian cells, and aleurone grains are observed; the powder when  
treated with 1N HCl on a microscope slide, becomes pink when observed in day light  
and pinkish red under UV light 254 nm. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.3  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Fatty oil                                  Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.15 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using toluene : ethyl acetate : methanol (80 : 20 : 0.4) on spraying with anisaldehyde-
sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 120oC,  spots appear at Rf.  
0.45, 0.53, 0.84 (all brown) and 0.31 (pink).
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Jatrophin, jatropholone A, fraxetin, coumarino-lignan (I).
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pana, Kaphahara, Pittahara, Recaka, ViÀaghna, Vi·abhedana 
 
34IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Misraka Sneha 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  Ën¡ha, Gulma, H¤droga, Jvara, Ka¸·u, Prameha, Raktavik¡ra,  
Sotha,  T¤À¸¡,  Ud¡varta,  Udara,  KuÀ¶a,  P¡¸·u,  Aj¢r¸a,  Sula,  
Graha¸¢roga,  GaraviÀa,  Bhagandara,  Ëmav¡ta,  PakÀ¡gh¡ta,  
Urustambha,  Granth¢,  P¡rsvsula,  Pl¢h¡roga,  DuÀ¶avra¸a,  
DuÀ¶aapaci 
DOSE  -  250 - 500 mg after purification.   
   
  
3513. Dugdhika (Wh.Pl) 
DUGDHIKË (Whole Plant) 
Dugdhik¡  consists  of  whole  plant  of  Euphorbia  prostrata  W.  Ait.  (Fam. 
Euphorbiaceae), an accepted substitute for  E. thymifolia, the official drug; it is a small  
more or less pubescent, much branched prostrate annual, found throughout India as a  
naturalized weed.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Sv¡dupar¸i, KÀ¢rin¢, Laghudugdhik¡, N¡g¡rjuni, GorakÀadugdh¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Bara, Kharui, Kerai, Dudiya, Shwet Keruee 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Raati Dudhelee, Naagalaa dudhelee 
Hindi    :Dudhi, Duddhi, Dudhdee, Chhotidudhi 
Kannada:Kempu nene hakki 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Nilappal 
Marathi:Lahaan naaytee, Naayeti, Lahaandudhi 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Dodhak, Hajardana, Baradodk, Hazardana 
Tamil   :Sittirappaladi, Sittirappaladi 
Telugu  :Peddivari manubaala 
Urdu    :Dudhi 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Branched prostrate with many stems spreading from the roots, slender upto 20 cm  
long; leaves green but occasionally purplish red, opposite, 2.5 to 5 mm long and 2 to 4  
mm broad, oblong or subquadrate, tip mucronate, base symmetric and more or less  
cordate, margin serrulate in upper portion, glabrous above, slightly pubescent beneath  
especially on the apex; petiole short, 1 mm or even less in length; tap root 1 to 3 mm in  
diameter; inflorescence cyathium in short axillary racemiform clusters, involucre lobes  
5, deltoid ovate, ciliate; nectary gland 4, minute; ovary tricarpellary,  suborbicular,  
stipitate, narrowly limbed long styles; stigma three branched, each bifid; capsule 1 to 1.5  
mm  long,  densely  hairy  on  ridges,  hairs  occasionally  present  on  the  surface;  fruit  
subglobosely trigamous, long  stalked; seeds 0.6 to 0.8 mm long, oblong, 4 angled,  
smooth with 5 to7 transverse  ribs,  reddish brown and bluntly pointed; smell oily; no  
characteristic taste.
36 b) Microscopic 
Root - T. S. of young root circular in outline, endodermis without casparian bands;  
triarch stele; mature roots phelloderm 6 to 8 layers, outer most layer thickly suberized;  
cork cells obliterated; cambium indistinct; broad xylem vessels solitary or in a group of  
2 or 3, surrounded by a number of radially arranged narrow vessels and tracheids;  
medullary rays short, one or two seriate and extend upto phloem.
Stem - Cross section of stem circular in outline, thick, non striated cuticle, interrupted by  
unicellular  or multicellular uniseritate trichomes upto  185  µ long  and 15  µ broad; 
paracytic stomata at some places; cortex with a few latex canals; pericyclic fibres in  
groups;  cambium  not  discernible;  medullary  rays  narrow,  1  or  2  cell  wide,  
parenchymatous pith with intercellular spaces.
Leaf  - Two types of hairs present (a) multicellular, multiseriate glandular hairs with  
single apical cell at leaf margins only, (b) uniseriate 1 to 3 celled hairs on the margins, at  
abaxial side and in apex; cross section shows dorso-ventral structure, single layered  
upper and lower epidermis, mesophyll and vascular bundles; in surface view, the abaxial  
epidermal  cells  angular  with  straight  cell  walls,  stomata  anomocytic  to  anisocytic,  
stomatal indices 17.6 to 26.3 and density 60 to 130; adaxial epidermal cell walls slightly  
wavy with globular thickening at the angles; stomata anisocytic, stomatal indices 11.4 to  
18.7 and stomatal density 25 to 60; palisade ratio 3 to 6; vascular bundles collateral, with  
bundle  sheath;  laticiferous  canals  observed;  vein  islet  1  to  5  and  vein  termination  
numbers is 3 to 13. 
Powder -  Powder  yellowish-green,  tasteless  with  oily  odour;  on  microscopical  
examination it shows angular and slightly wavy epidermal cells with stomata, uniseriate,  
1 to 3 celled trichomes or hairs and some pieces of glandular hairs parenchymatous  
patches, laticiferous canals, pollen grains, pieces of nectary glands, fragments of vessels,  
tracheids, fibres and stomata; when treated with 1N NaOH in methanol shows purple  
colour with yellowish tinge, and in acetic acid reddish yellow colour under UV - 254 nm.  
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.2  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     11   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     27   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
37T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using toluene : ethyl acetate (80 : 20) shows under UV (366 nm.) fluorescent zones at Rf.  
0.05 (Maroon), 0.15 (light blue) and 0.66 (red). On spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric  
acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 1200C, spots appear at Rf. 0.12  
(bright green), 0.23 (pinkish blue), 0.32 (pink), 0.38 (grey), 0.48 (dark greyish blue),  
0.52 (pink), 0.61 (magenta), 0.66 (magenta) and 0.94 (blue).
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Glucoside, Galactoside, β-sitosterol, Compesterol, Stigmasterol,  
Cholesterol.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Lava¸a, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara,  M£trala,  V¤Àya,  Garbhak¡raka,  ViÀtambhin¢,  Gr¡h¢,  
Malastambhaka, Dh¡tuv¤ddhikara, H¤dya. 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Gaganasundara Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  áv¡sa, K¤mi, KuÀ¶a, Prameha, Raktapitta, Prav¡hik¡, Rakt¡r¿a,  
Palita, Danta-ghuna, Dadru, Spho¶a 
DOSE  -  5-10 g. 
   
  
3814. Elavalukam (Sd) 
ELAVËLUKAê (Seed) 
Elav¡lukaÆ  consists  of  dried  mature  seed  of  Prunus  avium  Linn.f.  (Fam. 
Rosaceae), a tree cultivated in Kashmir and lower Himalayas of Uttar Pradesh and W.  
Bengal; seeds available in the market are enclosed in hard woody endocarp.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Aileyah, Elav¡l£h, Eluk¡khyah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Elavaaluka 
English:Sweet Cherry 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Aaluvaalu, Gilaas, Krusabala 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:-- 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Aaluvaalu 
Tamil   :-- 
Telugu  :Jeevakamu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Brown kernel, ovoid, with pointed apical end and blunt opposite end, with ridges  
on the surface, measuring 0.8 to 1 cm in length, weighing about 300 mg each; similar to  
a tiny almond kernel, having same taste and smell.
b) Microscopic 
Seed - T.S. of seed shows the outermost uneven layer of stone cells interrupted by  
longitudinally running spirally thickened vascular element; stone cells oval to circular,  
thick walled, pitted, pit canal clear, lumen narrow (distinction from stone cell of  P. 
amygdalus, where stone cells are squarish, with large lumen, showing pit occasionally  
and from stone cell of  P. domestica, where stone cells are very thick walled, closely  
striated  with  small  or  obliterated  lumen);  size  varies  greatly;  stone  cell  layer  
intermingled with very conspicucous pigment layer which contains hexagonal cells in  
surface  view  with  well  marked  pits  on  the  walls  followed  by  2  or  3  layers  of  
disintegrated cells; thick, brown inner epidermal layer covers the parenchymatous cells  
39of cotyledon which are angular, thick walled, completely filled with protein granules and  
oil globules; provasculature can be seen in the cotyledon.      
Powder - White, oily with brown pieces of seed coat, stone cells oval to circular thick  
walled  with  pit  canals,  spirally  thickened  vascular  elements,  parenchymatous  cells  
containing oil and protein granules.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.1  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     16   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract of the drug on silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using toluene : dichlora methane : ethanol : formic acid (10:5:3:1) as mobile phase  
shows seven bands on exposure to Iodine vapour at Rf. 017 (dark brown), 0.30, 0.46,  
0.60. 0.67, 0.71, 0.77 (all light brown). On spraying with 5% Ethanolic sulphuric acid  
reagent and heating the plate for 10 minutes at 105oC eight bands appear at Rf. 0.17,  
0.30 (both dark brown), 0.46, 0.52, 0.58, 0.67, 0.71, 0.77 (all light brown). 
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   Prunasin  (D-mandelonitrile- β-glucoside),  Quercetin-3-0-  
rutinosyl-7,  3-0-biglucoside,  Kaempferol-3-0-rutinosyl-4'-di-0-
glucosideand 6-ethoxykaempferol.
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara,  ViÀaghna.,  YonidoÀahara,  Var¸ya,  Stambhana,  
áukra¿odhaka, Vedan¡sth¡pana 
 
40IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  A¿vagandh¡ Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   Ar¿a,  Aruci,  D¡ha,  Jvara,  K¡sa,  Ka¸·u,  KuÀ¶ha,  P¡¸·u,  
Raktapitta,  T¤À¸¡,  Unm¡da,  Vra¸a,  Chardi,  Hrdroga,  K
¤niroga, Mukharoga, Medroga 
DOSE  -  3 - 6 g.   
   
  
4115. Gandira (Rt) 
GAÛÚÌRA (Root) 
Ga¸·¢ra consists of dried mature root of  Coleus forskohlii Briq . syn. C. barbatus 
Benth.  (Fam.  Lamiaceae),  a  perennial  branched  aromatic  herb;  found  in  subtropical  
western Himalayas, Nilgiri hills, Gujarat and Bihar, and also cultivated in Maharashtra.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Ga¸·¢ra (Sthalaja) 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Garmar, Garmal 
Hindi    :Garmar 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:-- 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :-- 
Telugu  :Jeevakamu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Roots light in weight, light brown, longitudinally wrinkled, tapering, with a few  
rootlets, cut surface yellowish-white; fracture, short, characteristic pleasing odour; taste,  
slightly bitter and pungent.
b) Microscopic 
T.S.  of  root  is  irregular  in  outline,  epidermal  cells  not  discernible  due  to  
secondary growth; outermost multilayered storied cork of rectangular cork cells, below  
which  is  1  or  2  layered  cork  cambium , followed  by  rectangular  parenchymatous  
secondary cortical region in which oval stone cells with narrow lumen and walls with  
radiating canals and containing rhomboidal calcium-oxalate crystals present; vascular  
cambium in the form of continuous ring; phloem consists of sieve tubes, companion cells  
and phloem  parenchyma; medullary rays well developed, radiating, varying in size,  
heterogenous as seen in tangential section; thin walled; in young root these are very  
broad as compared to the older ones; xylem represented by diffuse porous vessels,  
42mostly solitary; xylem parenchyma surrounding the tracheids and vessels, filled with  
starch grains of 20 to 60  µ m in diameter, hilum distinct, star-shaped central cleft,  
lamellae occasionally observed; xylem parenchyma well developed in the young root,  
however in the older one fibres abundant; central zone comprises of compactly arranged  
vessels, fibres and fibre tracheids, oil cells with oil globules present in cortical phloem  
and xylem regions. 
Powder - Powder yellowish-brown with pleasant aromatic smell, bitter in taste; powder  
shows numerous simple circular, ovoid, elliptical simple starch grains, 20 to 60 µ m in 
diameter, hilum distinct, star-shaped central cleft, occasionally lamellae observed; oil  
cells with oil globules, tracheids and vessels, parenchymatous cells filled with starch,  
tailed  vessels,  fibre  tracheids,  prismatic  calcium  oxalate  crystals;  powder  becomes  
greenish-brown under UV 254 nm with nitrocellulose in amylacetate and also with 50%  
KOH. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   9    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     16   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     23   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Essential oil                              Not less than     0.1  per cent, Appendix    2.2.10 
Coleonol                                   Not less than     0.15 per cent, Appendix    2.2.17A 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plates (0.2 mm thick)  
using toluene : ethyl acetate : methanol (80 : 20 : 0.5) shows under UV (366 nm)  
fluorescent spots at Rf. 0.14 (brick red), 0.20 (red), 0.25 (pink), 0.32 (brick pink), 0.46  
(blue), 0.55 (brick red), 0.59 (brick red), 0.67 (blue), 0.87 (green) and 0.95 (blue). On  
spraying  with  anisaldehyde-sulphuric  acid  reagent  and  on  heating  the  plate  for  ten  
minutes at 120oC, spots appear at Rf. 0.14 (brown), 0.2 (brown), 0.25 (light brown), 0.46  
(grey), 0.55 (orangish brown), 0.59 (brown) and 0.87 (yellow).
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   Diterpene,  coleonol,  coleosol,  deoxy-coleonol,  forskohlin,  
naphthopyrone, coleoforsine.
43PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :RukÀa, Sara, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara, V¡tahara, TridoÀahara, Vra¸a¿odhana, Vid¡h¢ 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  K¤mighna KaÀ¡ya C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  á£la, áotha, Ar¿a, Gulma, K¡sa, K¤mi, KuÀ¶ha, Udara, DuÀ¶a  
Vra¸a,  HutaviÀa,  Pliih¡roga,  Mand¡gni,  M£trabandha,  
Malabandha 
DOSE  -  3-5 g.
Remarks: Being a controversial drug, at present, the above species may be accepted as  
Sthalaja  Ga¸·¢ra. Others are Jalaja and a tree (Sara-taru) species. 
   
  
4416. Gavedhuka (Rt) 
GAVEDHUKA (Root)
Gavedhuka consists of the dried root of Coix lachryma-jobi Linn. syn. C. lachryma 
Linn. (Fam. Gramineae), a perennial or annual grass found in India, widely distributed  
throughout the plains and warm slopes of hills upto 1500 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Gavedhu, Gavedhuka 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Gadagad, Dedhaan, Devaan 
English:Adlay, Jobs tears 
Gujrati  :Kasai 
Hindi    :Kasai, Garheduaa, Garahedu, Gargari 
Kannada:Manjutti 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kaatugotampu, Kaakkappalunku 
Marathi:Kasai 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Kaattukuntumani 
Telugu  :Adaviguruginja 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Roots fibrous, 1 to 3 mm in thickness, present in tufts, unbranched with tapering  
ends, hollow in centre, straw coloured, woody smell and pungent taste.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. of root shows presence of ruptured piliferous layer consisting of closely  
packed elongated cells; below the epidermis one layered exodermis, a well developed  
cortex,  with  several  layers  of  parenchymatous  cells,  mostly  oval  or  rounded  with  
intercellular spaces present; exodermal cells are lignified; cortex consists of 4 or 5  
layered thick walled sclerenchymatous cells towards periphery; middle region consists of  
large thin walled parenchymatous cells and the inner region is made up of air spaces  
traversed by broad trabeculae; endodermis characterised by the presence of casparian  
strips  on  both  transverse  and  radial  walls,  pericyclic  fibres  thick  walled;  vascular  
bundles polyarch, composed of alternating strands of xylem and phloem, both with their  
usual elements; parenchymatous pith present, starch absent.
45Powder-  Powder light brown in colour, woody smell and pungent taste; shows thick  
walled fibres with broad lumen, tracheids with dense helical thickenings and border pits;  
shows hexagonal striated epidermal cells; double walled hexagonal sclerenchymatous  
cells of exodermis.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick) using  
toluene: ethyl acetate: methanol (85:15:0.5) shows under UV (366 nm) spots at Rf. 0.33  
(greenish blue) and 0.71 (light blue). After spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid  
reagent, spots appear at Rf. 0.34 (green) and 0.42 (purple). 
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   Benzoxazolinones,  amino  acids  (leucine,  tyrosine,  histadin,  
arginine and coicin). 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara, M£trala, Pittahara, K¡r¿niya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  ViÀ¸u Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  M£trakrcchra, Netra-Mas£rik¡, Pittaja Chardi, Sthaulya 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
4617. Ghonta (Fr)  
GHOÛÙË (Fruit) 
Gho¸¶¡  consists  of  fruit  of  Ziziphus  xylopyrus  Willd.  (Fam.  Rhamnaceae),  a  
straggling shrub distributed in North-West India, U.P., Bihar and South India, in moist  
deciduous forests.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Gho¶¢, Go¶ik¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Kulphal 
English:Jujab 
Gujrati  :Gatbadar, Gatabordi 
Hindi    :Ghunta, Kakora, Kaathabera 
Kannada:Yeranu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Ghoti, Bhorghoti 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Kottai, Mulkottai 
Telugu  :Gotti, Got, Gotiki 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit is a drupaceous berry, globular or rounded, diameter 1.2 to 1.8 cm; surface  
rough, warty; colour dark brown; point of detachment of stalk marked by a rounded  
concave depression upto 2 mm in diameter and a raised ring along the circumference; a  
pointed beak at the opposite end; occasionally seen; pericarp leathery and hard; endocarp  
stony; fruit 3-celled, each locule with one dark brown, orbicular, compressed, beaked,  
seed 5 to 8 mm across; cotyledons creamish yellow; odour not very distinct; taste,  
slightly astringent.
b) Microscopic 
A transverse section of the fruit reveals a thick cuticle followed by epidermis  
consisting  of  unevenly  arranged  rounded  cells;  scattered  thick-walled,  uniseriate,  
multicellular trichomes present on epidermis; mesocarp with three zones - narrow outer  
and inner zones of small, compactly arranged parenchyma cells; a third wide middle  
spongy  zone  composed  of  thin  walled  parenchyma  cells,  lacunated  and  containing  
47scattered vascular strands; endocarp consisting of thick walled stone cells, narrow fibres  
and a few lacunae, some stone cells containing prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate up  
to 12 µ in size; occasional inroads of mesocarp into the endocarp also seen; epidermis  
and a few outer layers of mesocarp adjacent to it contain abundant brown substances.
A section through the testa shows radially elongated, narrow, transluscent cells, followed  
by a subepidermal zone of crushed, thin walled, parenchyma cells demarcated inside by  
a reddish brown lining.
A section through the cotyledons shows an outermost epidermal layer of small, squarish  
cells and a ground tissue composed of rectangular thin walled, prominently nucleated  
cells rich in fixed oil.
Powder -  Thick walled uniseriate, multicellular, 200 to 260  µ long trichomes; fibres  
(upto 50 µ in width) and angular stone-cells with radial canals and circular striations, 40  
to 170 µ in size are seen- tissue fragments of epidermis in surface view present.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   12   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of  the  alcoholic  extract on  silica gel  'G'  plate  (0.2  mm  thick)  using  
chloroform : methanol (95:5) as mobile phase shows  on spraying with methanolic:  
sulphuric acid reagent and on heating the plate for ten minutes at 110oC spots at Rf. 0.24  
(Pink), 0.39 (Pinkish orange), 0.48 (Yellow), 0.61 (Pink), 0.71 (Blue).
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  The pulp of the fruit contains reducing sugars, sucrose, citric acid,  
carotene, vitamin C and tannins.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :ViÀaghna, V¡takaphahara 
 
48IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Ëragvadh¡di Kv¡tha C£ra¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  DuÀ¶avra¸a, Jvara, Ka¸·u, KuÀ¶ha, Prameha, Raktavik¡ra, Vra¸a,  
ávayathu, N¡·¢vra¸a, Vamana 
DOSE  -   3-6 g.  
   
  
4918. Gundrah (Rz.&Rt) 
GUNDRËH (Rhizome and Fruit) 
Gundr¡h consists of rhizome with root of Typha australis Schum . and Thonn. syn. 
T. angustata Bory and Chaub., (Fam. Typhaceae), a hardy perennial, monoecious plant,  
often growing gregariously in fresh water and marshy places, commonly found throughout  
India, upto 1730 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Gu¸¶hah, Gun¶hah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Hogalap 
English:Lesser Indian Reed-mace 
Gujrati  :Ghaabaajariyu 
Hindi    :Pater, Gondpater 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Ramban, Paankanis 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Gundra 
Tamil   :-- 
Telugu  :Jammugaddi, Enugajamu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Rhizome - 1 to 5 cm. long and 1 to 2.5 cm. wide pieces, external surface light brown,  
core yellowish-brown, transverse ridges on external surface, small roots and scaly leaves  
present attached on runners; fracture, hard, fibrous.
Root  - Adventitious,  rootlets  present,  2  to  15  cm  long,  yellowish-brown;  fracture,  
fibrous.
b) Microscopic 
Rhizome  - T.S.  shows  circular  outline;  single  layered  epidermis  consisting  of  
tangentially elongated cells, covered with thin cuticle; cortex divided into two parts -  
outer cortex comprising of 7 to 11 layers of thin walled parenchymatous cells, oval to  
polygonal in shape, having intercellular spaces; patches consisting of 10 to 35 fibres  
distributed in the entire outer cortex; fibres thick walled with tapering tips, varying in  
50length from 160 to 930  µ and in width from 10 to 30  µ; inner cortex consisting of  
aerenchyma; endodermis single layered; vascular bundles 35 to 42 in number, collateral,  
conjoint, vessels prominent; pith consisting of thin walled parenchymatous cells with  
intercellular spaces; starch grains in pith region, single or compound, spherical to oval  
and measuring from 5 to 25  µ in diam.; pith mucilagenous, as seen when mounted in  
Ruthenium red treated with a few drops of 10% lead acetate solution. 
Root- T.S. shows epiblema followed by a 4 to 6 layered hypodermis of thin walled  
cells  and  a  broad  cortex  consisting  of  radially  elongated  air  spaces  separated  by  
trabeculae; a few layers of cells forming the innermost layer of cortex, in contact with  
endodermis; vascular bundles with xylem vessels forming a circle; fibres thick walled  
with tapering tips, varying in length from 260 to 1480 µ and in width from 10 to 24 µ.
  
Powder - Brown, no specific odour and slightly acrid taste; shows abundant starch grains  
measuring 5 to 25 µ in diam., fragments of fibres, parenchyma cells and bordered pitted  
vessels.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on silica gel 'G' plates (0.2 mm thick) using  
chloroform : methanol (80:20) shows under UV (254nm) three spots at Rf. 0.30, 0.58  
and 0.72 (all violet). Under UV (366nm) three fluorescent spots appear at Rf. 0.58, 0.62  
and 0.72 (all blue). On exposure to iodine vapour five spots appear at Rf. 0.14, 0.30.  
0.40, 0.58 and 0.72 (all yellow). On spraying with 10% ethanolic potassium hydroxide  
and then observing under UV (366nm) shows two fluorescent spots at Rf. 0.58 (green)  
and 0.62 (blue). On spraying with 10% methanolic-sulphuric acid and heating the plate  
at 110oC for ten minutes six spots appear at Rf. 0.18 (brown), 0.40 (purple), 0.58  
(brown), 0.62, 0.67 (both purple) and 0.76 (brown). 
 
 CONSTITUENTS   -  Flavonoids (Quercetin, isorhamnetin-3-0-rutinoside); sterols ( β- 
sitosterol, lanosterol, cholesterol).
 
51PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :M£travirecan¢ya,  áukra¿odhaka,  Stanyajanana,  V¡tahara,  
PittasaÆ¿amana, Stanya¿odhaka, Rajo¿odhaka, M£traa¿odhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  M£travirecan¢ya KaÀ¡ya C£r¸a, Stanyajanana KaÀ¡ya  
C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  A¿mar¢, M£trak¤cchra, Raktapitta, áarkar¡, M£tr¡gh¡ta, Stanya  
KÀaya 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
5219. Himsra (Rt) 
HIêSRË(Root) 
HiÆsr¡ consists of root of Capparis spinosa Linn. (Fam. Capparidaceae), a thorny  
shrub distributed in the plains, lower Himalayas, and Western Ghats.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:AhiÆsr¡, Kanth¡r¢, T¢kÀ¸a, Kan¶ak¡ TikÀ¸agandh¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:Ceper Plant 
Gujrati  :Kabaree 
Hindi    :Kabara, Hainsaa, Kanthara 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Kabar 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Barar, Kaur 
Tamil   :-- 
Telugu  :Jeevakamu 
Urdu    :Kabar 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root pieces are upto 5.5 cm in thickness; bark rough to touch, thick showing  
longitudinal lenticels; freshly broken surface light yellowish; wood hard and compact;  
remnants of robust and slender rootlets present on the bark; colour varies from pale  
yellow to reddish-brown; no particular odour or taste.
b) Microscopic 
A transverse section of root characterised by outermost layer of slightly suberised  
corky zone of several layers showing irregular and broken outline; cork cambium made  
of 4 or 5 layers of thin walled, small, squarish cells; cortex consisting of thin walled,  
irregular or somewhat tangentially elongated cells; angular sclereids in groups of 2 to 3  
and upto 30 µ in size scattered in cortex; phloem in the form of multiple layers of cells  
forming a continuous cylinder around inner vascular zone, separated from the xylem by  
4 to 5 layers of vascular cambium; wedges of vascular elements with thick walled cells  
span the centre of the root and the outer zone; vessels isolated or in groups of two,  
distributed uniformly among xylem parenchyma, which has granular contents; medullary  
53rays of thin walled, mostly uniseriate, rectangular cells, often having granular contents;  
pith absent. 
Powder - Powder shows vessel fragments with simple pitted thickenings and tracheids  
with tapering or blunt ends; sclereids upto 30 µ size and in groups of 2 or 3.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   13   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     1    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcohol soluble extract of the drug on precoated silica gel 'G' plate  
(0.2 mm thick) using chloroform:methanol (95:5)  under UV (366nm) shows spots at Rf  
0.01 (Blue), 0.11  (Blue); 0.93(Blue).On spraying with anisaidehyde: sulphuric acid  
reagent and  heating the plate for  ten minutes at 110o C three spots  appear  at Rf  
0.32(Orange), 0.62 (Purple), 0.68 (Cream).
  
CONSTITUENTS   -  The roots contain alkaloid stachydrine. Glucobrassicin, neoglu-
cobrassicin  and  4-methoxyglucobrassicin  have  also  been  
identified    in the roots. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pan¢, Kaphahara, V¡tahara, Rucya. 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Am¤at¡di Taila, Kutikhadi Vatika, HiÆsr¡dya Gh¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   Ar¿a,  Gulma,  K¡sa,  V¡tarakta,  Vra¸a,  V¡tavik¡ra,  Sv¡sa,  
Galaga¸·a,  Ëmav¡ta,  G¤dhras¢,  Raktagranthi,  
V¡tikayoniroga, V¡ta¿opha, Granthi 
DOSE  -  1 - 3 g. 
   
  
5420. Hingupatri (Lf) 
HI×GUPATRÌ (Leaf) 
Hi´gupatr¢ consists of dried leaf of Ferula jaeschkeana Vatke  (Fam. Apiaceae), a  
perennial herb, producing a bunch of radi cal leaves around the base of the flowering axis  
and distributed in north-western Himalayas, on dry sunny slopes between 2000 and 3900  
m; abundant in Kashmir, Ladakh and Lahaul & Spiti in Himachal Pradesh.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Hingupar¸¢, Hingupatrik¡, B¡Àpik¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Hing, Desaj Hing 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Hing, Hingro, Hinglavadharni, Hingupatri 
Hindi    :Hingupatri 
Kannada:Doddahingina Balli 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kayam, Penungayam, Perungkayam 
Marathi:Hing Patree 
Oriya   :Hengu 
Punjabi:Hinge, Hing 
Tamil   :Inguva, Perungayam 
Telugu  :Hingo Patramu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaf upto 50 cm long, green, both radical and cauline, cauline are alternately  
arranged on the axis, 2 or 3 lobed, pubescent when young, petiole of cauline leaves  
broadly  sheathing,  decurrent,  lobe  oblong,  upto  10  cm  long,  margin  of  the  lobes  
distinctly serrate; odour, nil; taste, slightly spicy.  
b) Microscopic 
T.S. of cauline leaf shows midrib prominent below, isobilateral with a single  
layer each of upper and lower epi dermis of slightly thick walled cells and somewhat  
drum shaped in nature; anomocytic stomata present on both surfaces; simple unicellular  
trichomes present only on the lower epidermis; lamina wavy in outline with ridges and  
grooves, each groove containing a patch of collenchyma tous cells below epidermis;  
secretory  canals  present  below  the  collenchymatous  patches,  lined  by  8  to  10  
parenchymatous cells; two layers of pali sade cells present on both surfaces, spongy  
tissue composed of somewhat elongated cells; vascular bundles collateral with  xylem  
55above and phloem below; stomatal index 13 to 17;palisade ratio of 5 to 7 and vein-islet  
number 2 or 3.
Powder  -  Yellowish  green;  shows  under  microscope,  epidermis  with  anomocytic  
stomata, epidermal cells with unicellular trichomes, palisade cells, numerous isolated  
trichomes and vessels with spiral thickenings.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   13.0 per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.10 per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     30   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel G plate using methanol  
: chloroform (40: 60); shows under UV (365 nm) three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.52  
(blue fluorescence), 0.39 (quinching brownish-purple) and 0.12 (blue fluorescence).  
On expossure to iodine vapour  three zones appeared as brown colour  spots. On  
spraying with 2% vanillin sulfuric acid reagent shows three spots at Rf. 0.52 (Pink),  
0.39 (cream coloured) and 0.12 (brownish with blue tinge).
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :H¤dya, P¡cana, V¡takaphahara, Rucikara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Kum¡ry¡sava 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Ar¿a, Basti¿£la, H¤droga, K¤mi, Pl¢h¡roga, Unm¡da, Vibandha,  
Garbh¸¢, Gulmaroga, Apasn¡ra 
DOSE  -  3-6 g.   
   
  
5621. Itkata (Rt) 
ITKAÙA (Root) 
Itka¶a  consists of dried root of Sesbania bispinosa W. F. Wight (Fam. Fabaceae) an  
erect 1.5 to 2.5 m tall, annual, shrub with minute prickles on rachis and young branches,  
usually found as a weed in the rice fields or water logged areas in the plains of India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Utka¶a, Vanajayant¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Dhanicha, Dhunsha 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Sasee Ikad, Ikad 
Hindi    :Ikkada 
Kannada:Mullu jinangi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kitamu 
Marathi:Raanshevari, Chinchani 
Oriya   :Tentua 
Punjabi:Jhanjhan 
Tamil   :Mudchembai, Nirchembai 
Telugu  :Ettejangaa 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Chopped pieces of roots of variable sizes and thickness usually irregular in shape  
and with thick and thin rootlets, main roots 0.2 to 2.0 cm in diam. solid, no root nodules  
observed,  outer  surface light  brown, smooth;  wood  cream  in  colour, odourless  and  
tasteless.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows discontinuous cork, compressed and broken, 3 to 6 cells deep, thin  
walled; cortical cells parenchymatous, some containing prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate of about 16 to 25 µ  size and some containing tannins; towards the inner side of  
the cortex conical patches of sclerenchymatous fibre present, broader towards inner side  
and narrower towards the outside, phloem is about 5 cell deep, thin walled; cambium  
compressed, not very distinct; xylem vessels; usually with scalariform thickenings; ray  
cells uniseriate, with simple starch grains of 10 to 40 µ size and occasionally prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate; pith absent.
57Powder - Yellowish brown, fibrous, free flowing, characterized by the presence of large  
cells filled with tannins,  some small parenchymatous  cells containing  tannins,  long  
fibres, simple starch grains, tracheids and vessels with scalariform thickenings.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of methanol extract on silica gel 60 F 254 plate using Toluene : Acetone  
(90:10) shows eight spots at Rf  0.15, 0.24, 0.38, 0.46, 0.58, 0.61, 0.74 and 0.78 on  
spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for 15 minutes at  
110oC. 
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Amino acids such as lysine, arginine, histidine.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :M£travirecan¢ya, Pittahara, Stanyajanana, V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  M£travirecan¢ya C£r¸a, Stanyajanana, KaÀ¡ya C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   A¿mar¢,  áarkar¡,  Jvara,  K¡sa,  M£tragh¡ta,  M£trak¤cchra,  
Prati¿y¡ya, Netraroga, Pitt¡¿mar¢, M£traruj¡ 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
5822. Itkata (St) 
ITKAÙA(Stem) 
Itka¶a  consists of dried stem of Sesbania bispinosa W. F. Wight (Fam. Fabaceae)  
an erect 1.5 to 2.5 m tall, annual, shrub with minute prickles on rachis and young branches,  
usually found as a weed in the rice fields or water logged areas in the plains of India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Utka¶a, Vanajayant¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Dhanicha, Dhunsha 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Ikad, Sasee Ikad 
Hindi    :Ikkada 
Kannada:Mullu jinangi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kitamu 
Marathi:Chinchani, Raanshevari 
Oriya   :Tentua 
Punjabi:Jhanjhan 
Tamil   :Mudchembai, Nirchembai 
Telugu  :Ettejangaa 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug  consists  of  chopped  pieces of  stem, 0.2  to  2.5  cm  in  diam. with fine  
striations; size and thickness variable, minute prickles observed only on thin young  
branches; greenish-brown externally and cream coloured internally; pith soft and white;  
odourless and tasteless.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows wavy outline, epidermal cells tabular with moderately thick cuticle;  
some containing granular substances; cortex 5 to7 cells deep, composed of thin walled  
cells; some of those present below the epidermis contain tannins; endodermis present;  
pericycle composed of 3 to 6 cell layers of discontinuous patches of sclerenchymatous  
fibres about 20 to 33 µ in diam.; towards the inner side of the sclerenchymatous fibre  
patches, tannin filled ducts of different sizes present; phloem 3 to 6 cells deep; cambium  
3 to 5 cells deep, made up of compressed thin walled cells; xylem forms a closed ring  
around the central pith, showing secondary growth; the number of primary xylem equal  
59to the ridges present on the outer surface of the stem; xylem vessels range from  24 to 82  
µ in diam.; towards the inner side of the primary xylem, a cavity filled with tannins is  
present  similar  to  that  beneath  the  phloem;  ray  cells  show  starch  grains;  pith  
parenchymatous.
Powder :Yellowish-brown, fine fibrous, free flowing, characterized by the presence of  
large thin walled cells filled with tannins, thin walled parenchymatous cells abundant,  
tissues with stomata present, tracheids and fibre cells are also found.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of methanol extract on silica gel 60 F 254 plate using Toluene : Acetone  
(90:10) shows seven spots at Rf  0.15, 0.23, 0.28, 0.31, 0.38, 0.55 and 0.91 on spraying  
with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for 15 minutes at 110oC.
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Amino acids such as  lysine, arginine, histidine.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :Pittahara, V¡tahara, áleÀmaprakopaka, Stanyajanana M£travirecan¢ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Candan¡di Taila (Caraka) 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  A¿mar¢, Jvara, K¡sa, M£tragh¡ta,  M£trak¤cchra, Netraroga,  
Pitt¡¿mar¢, Prati¿y¡ya, árkar¡, M£traruj¡. 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
6023. Jalapippali (Wh.Pl) 
JALAPIPPALÌ (Whole Plant) 
Jalapippal¢ consists of the dried whole plant of Phyla nodiflora Greene syn. Lippia 
nodiflora Mich. (Fam. Verbenaceae) a small creeping perennial herb found commonly in  
sandy wet, grassy places along bunds of irrigation channels, canal edges and river banks  
almost throughout greater part of India and up to 900 m on the hills.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Jalapippalik¡, Toyavallar¢, áarad¢, Matsy¡dan¢, Matsyagandh¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Bukkana, Kaanchadaa 
English:Purple Lippia 
Gujrati  :Rataveliyo 
Hindi    :Jalpipali, Panisigaa, Bhuiokaraa 
Kannada:Nelahippali 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Nirtippali, Podutalai (Siddha) 
Marathi:Jalpippali, Ratavel  
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Potuttali 
Telugu  :Bokkena 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Fibrous, branched, brown in colour, 2 to 10 cm in length and 1.0 to 1.5 mm in  
diam., nodal roots are smaller, 0.5 to 1.0 cm in length and unbranched.
Stem - Much branched, sub quadrangular, 1 to 2 mm in diam., rooting at nodes, more or  
less clothed with appressed, two armed, white hairs when seen under 10x, brownish-
green, length of internode 5.0 to 9.0 cm. 
Leaf - Opposite, sub-sessile, 1.5 to 3.7 cm long and 1 to 2 cm broad, spathulate, cuneate  
at the base, deeply and sharply serrate in the upper part, appressed by two armed, white  
minute hairs on both sides. 
Flower -  Sessile, densely packed in long pedunculate axillary spikes, mature ones 1.0 to  
2.0 cm long and 0.4 to 0.5 cm broad, flowering densely becoming oblong during fruiting;  
61peduncles 2.5 to 7.5 cm long, bracts about 2.5 mm long, broadly elliptic or obovate,  
cuneate  at  base,  mucronate,  glabrous;  calyx  2.0  mm  long,  membranous,  bilobed,  
compressed,  mitre-shaped,  pubescent  underneath  with  ordinary  trichomes  closely  
covering the fruit, the acuminate lobes projecting beyond it; corolla 2.5 to 3.0 mm long,  
white or light pink, bilipped, upper lip erect and bifid, lower lip 3 lobed of which the  
middle lobe largest, falling off as a calyptra when fruits ripens; stamens 4, didynamous,  
anthers  2-celled,  dehiscing  longitudinally,  dorsifixed;  ovary  superior,  bicarpellary,  
ovules in each cell solitary; style short,  stigma oblique, subcapitate.
Fruit - Small, 1.5 to 2.0 mm long, globose, oblong, spliting into two, 1-seeded plano-
convex pyrenes; seeds exalbuminous about 1 mm in size.
b) Microscopic 
Root - T.S. shows slightly wavy outline composed of a single layered epiblema;  
cortex 6 to 9 cells deep, most of the outer cortical cells in the nodal roots contain  
chloroplast; some of the cortical cells towards the inner side are thick walled; phloem  
cells are irregularly thick walled consisting of sieve tubes, companion cells and phloem  
parenchyma; xylem composed of vessels, tracheids, parenchyma and fibers; vessels are  
variable in size, range in diameter from 16 to 65 µ; medullary rays about 2 or 3 cells in  
width, cells are pitted; pith absent.
Stem -  T.S. shows a nearly quadrant outline with ridges and deep furrows, striated  
cuticle, a single  layer  of  epidermis with cells longer  than broad;  surface possesses  
unicellular trichomes with two unequal arms which usually gets detached; cortex is  
about 7 cells deep in the furrows, mainly chlorenchyma while those of ridges are of  
collenchyma; a few cells contain amorphous inclusions and many inner cells contain  
chloroplast; endodermis observed; pericycle 2 or 3 layers of cells, thick walled; phloem  
compressed and 5 or 6 cells deep; xylem a continuous ring, broader at the troughs. Pith  
large, composed of thin walled parenchymatous cells; central cells usually degenerated,  
but several others may occasionally contain a few chloroplasts.
Leaf  -  Isobilateral,  epidermis  single  layered  followed  by  a  layer  of  palisade  cells;  
occasionally, a layer palisade also occurs adjacent to the lower epidermis; in surface  
view, the epidermal cells have straight walls; stomata diacytic, present on both lower and  
upper surface, but more in number on lower surface, covering and glandular trichomes  
occur on both the surfaces; unicellular, 2 unequally armed warty trichomes, with pointed  
tips are frequent on both the surfaces; midrib vascular bundle possesses xylem on dorsal  
side and phloem on ventral side; stomatal index of upper and lower surface 11 to 18 and  
18 to 30 respectively; the palisade ratio of upper surface 6 to 11 and that of lower  8 to  
13.   
Powder:  Greenish-brown,  fibrous,  free  flowing,  characterized  by  the  presence  of  
glandular hairs, 2 armed trichomes which are usually attached to a epidermal cell from  
62the  slightly  protruded  stalk  present  in  the  middle,  trichomes  warty,  leaf  epidermis  
characterized by the presence of circular trichome scars, vessels and palisade cells.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   27   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of methanol extract on silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform : Methanol  
(95:05) shows five spots at Rf  0.21, 0.26, 0.34, 0.40 and 0.79 on spraying with Vanillin-
Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for 15 minutes at 110oC.
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Flavonoids namely nodiflorin A and nodiflorin B, nodifloretin,  
lippiflorins A and B.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pan¢,  H¤dya,  Kaphahara,  Pittahara,  Rucya,  ViÀaghna.,  M£tral,  
Jvaraghna, áukarala, Mukha¿odhan¢, CakÀuÀya, Sangr¡hi 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Ak¢ka, PiÀ¶¢, Ak¢ka Bhasma 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  áv¡sa, D¡ha, Jvara, K¤mi, RaktadoÀa, T¤À¡, Visarpa, Vrana,  
Raktaroga, Bhrama, M£rch¡, Pitt¡tis¡ra 
DOSE  -  2 to 3 g powder, 
               1/2 to 2 ml juice. 
   
  
6324. Jivakaha (Pseudo bulb) 
JÌVAKAH (Pseudo Bulb) 
J¢vakah consists of dried and fresh pseudo-bulb of Malaxis acuminata D. Don syn. 
Microstylis wallichii Lindl. (Fam. Orchidaceae), a short stemmed terrestrial herb up to 25  
cm in height, distributed throughout India on hills at an altitude of 2000 -3000 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:J¢vya, D¢rgh¡yu, Ciraj¢v¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:Jeevak 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Jeevak 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Jeevakam 
Marathi:-- 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Jeevakam 
Telugu  :Jeevakamu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fresh pseudo bulb conical in shape, fleshy, green, smooth, shining, 1 to 9 cm long  
and 1 to 3 cm broad, slightly mucilagenous, covered with shining, transluscent light  
green, membraneous, 3 or 4 sheathing leaves arranged alternately and having parallel  
venation; stem rudimentary; roots arising at the union of stem and bulb.
Dried pseudo bulbs conical, transluscent, reddish-brown in colour, measuring 2 to 5 cm  
long and 0.25 to 1 cm wide, covered with sheathing leaves, which are light brown,  
membraneous with parallel venation; surface rough, punctated, fracture hard; cut surface  
dark brown, coarsely granulated with irregular margins and white spots; pleasant smell;  
astringent, slightly mucilagenous in taste.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. of pseudo bulb oval to circular in outline; section passing through scaly  
leaves which exfoliate, showing  a single layered, thick walled, sclerified epidermis  
64having acicular crystals of calcium oxalate, followed by mesophyll adjacent to the upper  
epidermis  composed  of  2  to  4  layers  of  elongated  cells  with  lignified  reticulate  
thickening the lignification was confirmed with phloroglucinol and Conc. HCl, devoid of  
chlorolplast; vascular bundles prominent, phloem well developed with large sieve plates,  
surrounded by sclerenchymatous bundle sheath; section passing through bulb shows a  
single layer of cuticle and a layer of thick walled sclerified epidermal cells; below this  
lie  1  or  2  layers  of  large  sclerified  cells  and  these  extend  unevenly  into  ground  
parenchymatous tissue; ground parenchyma irregular, with large air spaces with passage  
cells in the form of small protuberances at some places; vascular bundles scattered  
throughout the ground tissue surrounded by thick walled sclerenchymatous cells, which  
occasionally extend into intercellular spaces. 
Powder -  Yellowish-brown in colour, pleasant smell, slightly bitter and astringent in  
taste, shows groups of mesophyll cells with reticulate thickenings inside; vessels with  
spiral, scalariform and reticulate thickening; fibre tracheids of about 600 µm long upto 
80 µm broad, and tracheids (about 19 µm long and 40 µm broad); groups of parenchyma  
with  accicular  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate,  sieve  plates,  sieve  tubes  and  angular  
parenchymatous cells. Powder when treated with conc. HNO3  on microscopic slide  
emits light green fluorescence under UV 365 nm.  
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Starch                                     Not less than     19   per cent, Appendix    2.2.13 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using toluene : ethyl acetate (90 : 10) [double run] shows spots after spraying with  
anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 120oC at Rf. 
0.12 (orange), 0.18 (purple), 0.29 (grey), 0.38 (orange) and 0.59 (brown). 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Alcohol (ceryl alcohol), glucose, rhamnose and diterpenes.
65PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Picchila, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :Balya,  Pittahara,  Ras¡yana,  V¡tahara,  Dh¡tuvardhaka,  áukrala,  
BraÆha¸a, Snehopaga, J¢van¢ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   -  M¡nasamitra Va¶aka, Da¿amul¡riÀ¶a, Cyavanapr¡¿a,  
Br¡hma  Ras¡yana,  áivagu¶ik¡,  Am¤tapr¡¿a  Gh¤ta,  
A¿oka  Gh¤ta,  Dh¡nvantara  Taila,  Bal¡  Taila,  
Guducy¡di Taila, B¤hat A¿vagandh¡ Gh¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  áv¡sa, D¡ha, K¡sa, KÀaya, Raktapitta, Raktavik¡ra, K¡r¿ya, áoÀa 
DOSE  -  5-10 g. 
   
  
6625. Kadara (Ht.Wd) 
KADARAH(Heart Wood) 
Kadarah consist of dried pieces of heart wood of Acacia suma Buch .-Ham. (Fam. 
Mimosaceae), a medium sized tree with white bark exfoliating in papery flakes with  
horizontal patches of darker colour, found in W. Bengal, Bihar and Southern Western  
Ghat.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Somavalkh, ávetakhadirah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Shvet Khadir 
English:White Cutch tree, White Catechu 
Gujrati  :Gorada, Gordio baaval 
Hindi    :Safed Khair 
Kannada:Kandarah 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Venkarinnali, Somarayattoli 
Marathi:Paandharaa Khair 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Kovil, Shilaiyunchai 
Telugu  :Tellatumma, Tellasundra, Tellachandra 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Heart wood in cut rectangular pieces showing knots; pale yellow, rough; fracture,  
hard, emits faint odour of wood, almost tasteless.
b) Microscopic 
Heart wood -  Transverse section shows diffuse porous wood, indistinct growth rings;  
vessels occasionally occur in pairs or in group of 3; paratracheal parenchyma abundant,  
vasicentric, filled with starch granules and prismatic calcium oxalate crystals, medullary  
rays wide, straight, multiseriate.
A tangential section shows heterocellular, multiseriate; medullary rays 5 to 7 times  
higher than the breadth; that is upto or over 50 cells vertically and about 10 to 12 cells  
across  at  their  widest  level;  medullary  rays  are  surrounded  by  crystal  sheath  with  
prismatic  crystals;  fibres  are  aseptate  pitted;  compactly  arranged  narrow  squarish  
67lignified  tracheids;  vessels  with  simple  bordered  pits;  xylem  parenchyma  contain  
prismatic crystal of calcium oxalate; gums and tannins.
Powder - Yellow coloured, coarse, not free flowing; under microscope shows a number  
of fibres, vessels, thick walled cells of medullary rays, occasional crystals of calcium  
oxalate and thick lignified tissues and starch grains, fluorescence test negative, when an  
extract in alcohol / water is examined under 366 nm and 254 nm.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on silica gel 'G' (0.2 mm thick ness) plate using  
toluene : methanol (7:3) shows ten bands at Rf. 0.13, 0.26, 0.34, 0.38 (all yellow), 0.43  
(purple), 0.47 (light brown), 0.51 (sky blue), 0.61 (pinkish brown), 0.69 (pink with blue  
border)  0.78  (grey). On  spraying  with  5%  Ethanolic-sulphuric  acid  reagent  and  on  
heating the plate for ten minutes at 105oC, ten bands appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.21, 0.29, 0.53  
(all purple), 0.66, 0.71 (both brown), 0.78 (purple core with blue border), 0.83, 0.90,  
0.99 (all grey).
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  An alkaloid diaboline, β-sitosterol, stigmasterol, oleanolic acid and  
its  3β-acetate,  a  saponin  containing  oleanolic  acid,  galactose,  
mannose.
 
68PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Va¿ada 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara, Pittahara, Var¸ya, Rakta¿odhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Ayask¤ti 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   Ka¸·u,  KuÀ¶ha,  Mukharoga,  P¡¸·u,  RaktadoÀa,  Vra¸a,  
Madhumeha, Udarda, MedodoÀa, ávitra 
DOSE  -  2-6 g.   
   
  
6926. Kakajangha (Sd)  
KËKAJA×GHË (Seed) 
K¡kaja´gh¡ consists of dried mature seed of Peristrophe bicalyculata (Retz.) Nees 
(Fam. Acanthaceae), an erect hispid herb 60 to 180 cm tall, found in forests and waste  
lands almost throughout the country.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Na·¢k¡nt¡, K¡katikt¡, Pr¡c¢bala, Suloma¿¡, V¡yasaja´gh¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Naaskaaga 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Kaaliaghedi, Kariaghedi, Aghedi 
Hindi    :Atrilal, Masi, Kaakjanghaa 
Kannada:Cibigid, Cibirsoppu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Raankiraayat 
Marathi:Ghaatipittaapapadaa, Raankiraayat 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Chebira 
Telugu  :Chebira 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Black, orbicular, 1.7 to 2 mm, slightly rugose, bitter with oily feeling on tongue  
and no special odour.
b) Microscopic 
Seed :Transverse section of seed shows testa having single layered epidermis, cells  
appearing straight walled and angular in surface view producing short stout unicellular  
hairs having recurved hooks and dark contents;  tegmen 2 layered, parenchymatous;  
cotyledon has outer most epidermis and inner single layer of palisade like parenchyma  
and 4 or 5 layers of shorter cells; cotyledon shows provasculature at some places; cells  
contain protein aleurone grains and oil at some places.
Powder :The powder is blackish-yellow in colour; it shows hairs, a few cells of palisade  
parenchyma and cells of cotyledon with oil can also be seen, straight walled packed  
angular epidermal cells of testa with scars of hairs.
70IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.1  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on silica gel 'G' (0.2 mm thick ness) plate using  
toluene : dichloromethane : ethanol : formic acid (10:3:3:1) shows under U.V. (366 nm)  
five greenish blue fluorescent bands at Rf. 0.14, 0.18, 0.22, 0.39, 0.54. On exposure to  
Iodine vapour six bands appear at Rf. 0.18 (greenish brown), 0.22, 0.37 (both light  
brown), 0.53, 0.68, 0.74 (all yellow). On spraying with 5% Ethanolic-sulphuric acid  
reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 105oC, eleven bands appear at Rf. 0.14,  
0.22, 0.30, 0.37 (all light brown), 0.48 (greenish brown), 0.53 (yellowish brown), 0.56  
(brown), 0.59 (pinkish brown), 0.68 (lower half blue and upper half pink), 0.74, 0.87  
(both pinkish brown).
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Picchila, Sara 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Var¸ya, ViÀaghna, Kaphapittanut, K¤mighna, Vra¸ahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Mah¡viÀagarbha Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  ál¢pada, áoÀa, B¡lagraha, DuÀ¶avra¸a, Graha¸¢, Jvara, Ka¸·u,  
Pradara, Prati¿y¡ya, Raktapitta, ViÀamajvara, B¡dhirya, P¡ndu,  
KÀata  KÀ¢¸a,  Jantak¤mi,  Sidhma,  SarpaviÀa,  áastrakÀata,  
Galaga¸da, Apac¢ 
DOSE  -  1- 3 g.   
   
  
7127. Kakanaja(Fr)  
KËKANAJA (Fruit) 
K¡kanaja  consists  of  dried  mature  fruit  of  Physalis  alkekengi  Linn.  (Fam. 
Solanaceae), it occurs in S. Europe through China to Japan; it does not occur in India, but  
fruits are available in the Indian bazaar, in the name of kakanaja.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Rajaputrika 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Kakanaja 
English:Winter cherry, Bladder cherry 
Gujrati  :Kakanaja 
Hindi    :Kakanaja 
Kannada:Kakanaja 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kakanaja 
Marathi:Kakanaja 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Kaaknaj 
Tamil   :Sisayakkaali, Tottakkaali 
Telugu  :Kupante 
Urdu    :Kakanaj 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Red  coloured  berry,  globose,  about  1  to  1.5  cm  in  diameter,  outer  surface  
wrinkled,  with  dried  flesh;  unilocular,  completely  packed  with  seeds,  overlapping,  
centrally oriented, insignificant placenta present; seeds 1.8 to 2.2 mm, numerous, flat,  
with curved embryo, hilum in the concavity; fruit sweet and sour in taste.
b) Microscopic 
Fruit - Cuticle present; fruit wall not distinguishable as epicarp, mesocarp and  
endocarp clearly; the outer layer consists of a single layer of non lignified, thin walled  
cell with brown contents; below this are a few layers of horizontally oriented cells with  
orange contents and loosely arranged layers of parenchyma, with mucilage cells; inner  
layers of the fruit wall and the placentae proliferate into the locule packed with minute  
seeds.
72Seed - T.S. is elongated with a projection at both ends; testa has an outermost papillose  
thin walled cells followed by thickened sclereids, which appear bone shaped at the  
projected parts, the latter showing pits on their walls; below are 2 or 3 layers of thin  
walled cells followed by  a thick  cuticle and  inner  lignified  single  layered tegmen;  
endosperm contains thin walled polygonal parenchymatous cells filled with aleurone  
grains, oil globules and occasional sandy calcium oxalate crystals; embryo curved if  
present.
Powder -  The powder is brownish-orange in colour; shows sclereids, parenchymatous  
cells, endospermic parenchymatous cells rich in oil and aleurone grains.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     22   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on silica gel 'G' (0.2 mm thick ness) plate using  
toluene : methanol (7:3) shows eleven bands at Rf. 0.11 (dark brown), 0.38, 0.44, 0.46,  
0.52, 0.56 (all light grey), 0.66 (dark brown), 0.72, 0.78, 0.83, 0.88 (all light grey),  on  
spraying with 5% Ethanolic-sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes  
at 105oC.
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   Auroxanthin,  mutatoxanthin,  phydalein,  zeaxanthin,  β-
Cryptoxanthin  from the calyx of the fruit; glycoalkaloids detected in the seeds but  
alkaloids were absent in the fruit.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Balya,  M£trala,  V¡tahara,  D¡ha¿¡maka,  Virecana,  á£lan¡¿in¢,  
Raktavidr¡va¸¢ 
 
73IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Lauha Ras¡yana 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  áopha, áv¡sa, Jvara, K¡sa, Ka¸·u, Visarpa, Vra¸a, P£yameha,  
Tamaka¿v¡sa 
DOSE  -  5-10 g. in the powder form. 
   
  
7428. Kaliyaka (Rt &St) 
KËLÌYAKA (Root and Stem) 
K¡l¢yaka consists of the dried root & stem of Coscinium fenestratum (Gaertn.) 
Colebr. (Fam. Menispermaceae), a large woody climber with stout stem and branches,  
occurring in the Western Ghats. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Kalambaka, K¡l¢ya, K¡l¢y¡khya, K¡leyaka 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:False Calumba 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Jhaar-ki-hald 
Kannada:Mardaa arashinaa 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Maramanjal 
Marathi:Venivel 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Atturam, Kadari, Manjalkoid 
Telugu  :Manu pasupu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - 5  to  30  cm  or  more  in  length,  2  to  5  cm.  in  diameter,  somewhat  
longitudinally  grooved,  transversely  cut  surface  smooth,  yellow;  texture  rough  and  
fibrous; acrid in taste; no particular odour.
Stem - 15 to 30 cm. or more in length, 2 to 8 cm. in diameter, straight or occasionally  
slightly twisted, pale grey or greyish yellow with a fairly smooth surface, marked with  
longitudinal striations spaced about a mm apart, cut surface yellowish-green to yellow in  
colour  showing  wedge shaped  areas, fissured with shallow vertical slits of  varying  
length; texture, hard; acrid in taste.
b) Microscopic 
Root - Transverse section circular in outline; cork cream coloured, 20 to 30 or more rows  
of uniform rectangular cells with 1 to 2 stone cells; outer cortical tissue characterized by  
the presence of very prominent yellowish band almost in the form of ring of thick  
75walled, pitted stone cells; prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate found in the thick walled  
cells; sieve tubes with simple   perforation plate; evident in L.S.; narrow radiating wedge  
shaped xylem strips; alternating with wedge shaped, broad, multiseriate medullary rays  
with thick walled cells filled with rod shaped crystals of calcium oxalate and starch  
grains  which  are circular, appearing  lenticular  on  edge  view, simple, 30-45  µm  in 
diameter; hilum indistinct or dot-like, centrally placed if present, lamellae indistinct;  
vessels filled with tyloses and in mature root these tyloses become thick walled giving  
the appearance of stone cells; fibres long, lignified.
Stem - The transverse section circular in outline, shallowly crenate; cork 20 to 40 cells  
thick; cortex 5 to 8 layers of tangentially elongated parenchymatous cells having very  
conspicuous yellowish crenate bands of hard tissue or stone cells with radiating canals  
and filled with dark yellow contents, almost capping the wedge shaped medullary rays  
and phloem; sclerotic elements cubical to oval with very thick pitted walls filled with  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; phloem distinct; xylem narrow, radiating, wedge  
shaped as in root, vessels 70 to 160 µm in diameter, solitary, pitting reticulate with small  
lenticular orifices, occluded  with   thick walled tyloses; fibres septate to nonseptate,  
septate fibres having 2 to5 septa, 270 to 400 µm long and 12 µm in diameter; medullary  
rays extend from pith to periphery, broad, multiseriate, 15 to many cells high and 2 to  
many  cells  wide;  pith  consist  of  two  regions:  (i)  4  to  6   layers  of   smaller  
collenchymatous cells in the periphery; (ii) parenchymatous cells circular to polyhedral  
in shape with intercellular spaces, cells larger towards the centre.
Powder - Powder of both root and stem yellow with greenish tinge, bitter and odourless.  
Microscopical examination shows the presence of fibres, tyloses, stone cells containing  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, starch grains circular appearing lenticular shaped  
on edge view, simple, 30-45 µm in diameter hilum indistinct or dot like centrally placed  
if present, lamellae indistinct, fragments of vessels, tracheids and parenchymatous cells;  
when treated on microscopic slide with 1N NaOH aqueous solution and mounted in  
nitrocellulose  in  amylacetate  emits  very  characteristic  canary  yellow  colour  under  
UV-365 nm.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.4  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     11   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Total alkaloid as berberine chloride Not less than      2    per cent, Appendix   2.2.18 
 
76Stem - 
Foreign matter   :    Not more than 1 percent, Appendix 2.2.2.
Moisture content   :    Not more than 6 percent, Appendix 2.2.9. 
Total ash   :    Not more than 3 percent, Appendix 2.2.3. 
Acid insoluble ash   :    Not more than 2 percent, Appendix 2.2.4. 
Alcohol soluble extractive             :    Not less than   3 percent, Appendix 2.2.6.  
Water soluble extractive   :    Not less than   8 percent, Appendix 2.2.7.  
Total alkaloid as berberine chloride  :    Not less then   1 percent, Appendix 2.2.18 .
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using isopropanol : formic acid : water (45 : 0.1 : 0.4) shows under UV (366 nm)  
fluorescent spots at Rf. 0.10, 0.17, 0.24, 0.34, 0.39, 0.5, 0.56, 0.78 at similar Rf. On  
spraying with modified Dragendroff's reagent orange spots appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.24, 0.34,  
0.83 and 0.89.   
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Alkaloids-berberine, palmitine, jatrorrhizine, proto-berberne, N, N-di-
lindacarpine, thalifendine and columbamine.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Stem : Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, Stem : Laghu, Stem : RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta, Stem : á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u, Stem : Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pana,  P¡cana,  Pittahara,  áleÀmasaÆa¿mana,  Kaphamedohara,  
Anulomaka,  Rakta¿odhaka,  Stem  :  áleÀmasaÆa¿mana,  Stem  :  
Pittahara, Stem : Kaphamedohara, Stem : D¢pana, Stem : P¡cana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  (No Formulations)
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   Root  :,  Agnim¡ndya,  Aj¢r¸a,  K¤mi.,  Kar¸a¿£la,  Prameha,  
Raktapitta,  Vra¸a,  Tikta-Usna,  J¢r¸a  Jvara,  Adhm¡na,  
K¡mal¡, Stem :, Agnim¡ndya, A¿mar¢, Aj¢r¸a, Daha, Jvara,  
K¤mi,  KuÀ¶ha,  P¡¸duroga,  Prameha,  UpadaÆsa,  Vra¸a,  
Adham¡na Yakrt Vik¡na, Yuv¡napidak¡, Vyanga 
   
  
7729. Kapitana (St.Bk) 
KAPÌTANA (Stem Bark) 
Kap¢tana consists of stem bark of Thespesia populnea (L.) Soland. ex Correa syn.  
Hibiscus populneus Linn. (Fam. Malvaceae), a fast growing, medium-sized evergreen tree,  
upto 10 m tall with yellow, cup-shaped flowers having maroon centre and distributed  
throughout coastal forests of India and also largely grown as a roadside tree.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:P¡riÀah, Kandarala, Phal¢¿ah, Gardabh¡¸·ah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Gajashundi, Paraasapipula 
English:Portia tree, Umbrella tree 
Gujrati  :Paaraspipalo 
Hindi    :Paaraspipal 
Kannada:Huvarasi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Punavasu, Pupparutti 
Marathi:Parasa pimpala 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Chilanti, Punarasu 
Telugu  :Ganyaraavi, Munigangaraavi 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark occurs in flat to slightly curved pieces, varying in thickness according to  
age and parts of tree from where it is taken; external surface rough due to numerous  
irregularly scattered lenticels, fissured, exfoliating in irregular scales, greyish-brown;  
inner surface, laminated, foliaceous, reddish-brown; fracture, fibrous; no characteristic  
odour; taste, astringent.
b) Microscopic 
Shows outer exfoliating layer in hard, woody, older barks; cork cells, thin-walled,  
10 to 20 layered, rectangular; cortex many layered, outer cortex consisting of closely  
packed, small, polygonal cells, inner cortex composed of large, rectangular to polygonal  
cells;  bast  fibres,  abundant  in  groups,  outer  groups  radially  elongated  and  inner  
tangentially; medullary rays of two types, narrow, uni to triseriate of slightly elongated  
rectangular cells and wide, multiseriate, irregularly arranged; large ducts in cortex filled  
78with yellow to orange contents; yellow inclusions present in the cells of outer cortex;  
rosette calcium oxalate crystals scattered in cortex and medullary rays; starch grains,  
simple or compound in phloem region.
Powder -Reddish-brown; shows stratified cork tissue, numerous fibres in groups with  
narrow lumen and bluntly pointed ends; phloem parenchyma cells with large single  
rosette calcium oxalate crystal; starch grains, simple to 2 or 3 compound; hilum, distinct.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   13   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using chloroform : methanol : formic acid (100:2.5:1) shows spots at Rf. 0.12 (brown),  
0.18 (brown), 0.29 (brown) and 0.61 (reddish when hot turns yellowish on cooling) on  
spraying with vanillin-sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105oC for about ten 
minutes.
CONSTITUENTS  -  Flavonoids, steroids and sesquiterpenoidal quinines.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :áukrala,  Kaphahara,  Medohara,  Pittahara,  Stambhana,  V¡tahara,  M
£trasa´graha¸¢ya,  Sandh¡n¢ya,  Sa´gr¡h¢,  Bhagnasandh¡nak¤ta,  
PuÆsavanam 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Nyagrodh¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  áotha, D¡ha, Dadru, Ka¸·u, Prameha, Raktapitta, Raktavik¡ra, T
¤À¡, Vra¸a, Yoniroga, Medoroga, Tvakroga, B¡lavisarpa, P¡m¡ 
DOSE  -  100 ml kv¡tha.  
   
7930. Karkasha(Rt.)  
KARKAáA (Root) 
Karka¿a  consists  of  the  root  of  Momordica  dioica  Roxb.  ex  Willd.  (Fam.  
Cucurbitaceae) a vine found throughout India up to an altitude of 1500 m, also cultivated  
for its fruits, which are used as vegetables.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Karko¶ak¢, Vandhy¡ Karko¶ak¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Titkaankarol 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Baanjhakartolaa, Kankodi 
Hindi    :Vanakakodaa, Baanja, Khekhasaa, Kakodaa 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Vaanjh-Kartoli, Kartole 
Oriya   :Kaankada 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Paluppakai 
Telugu  :Aagaakar 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Finely chopped pieces of tuberous roots, outer surface rough and greyish-brown,  
central portion white to cream, starchy, friable; fracture, fibrous; odourless and slightly  
bitter taste.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows cork 6 to 9 cells deep, cells brick-shaped and arranged in rows with  
greyish-brown contents; cork cambium cells similar in structure and size followed by a  
zone of compressed cells 2 to 4 cells deep; cortex composed of about 10 layers of cells,  
thin walled, irregular in shape and parenchymatous, towards the inner side of the cortex,  
scattered solitary or groups of sclerenchymatous cells are present; phloem 6 to 8 cells  
deep, phloem parenchyama usually filled with starch grains of about 16 to 25 µ in diam.; 
xylem composed of scattered vessel strands and xylem parenchyma; most of the vessels  
are usually solitary or found in groups of 2 or 3; xylem parenchyma contains round or  
oval starch grains similar to that in phloem.
80Powder:  Whitish-brown,  free  flowing,  characterized  by  the  presence  of  
sclerenchymatous cells, showing radial pit canals and narrow lumen; starch grains, cork  
cells and parenchymatous cells are also present. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     31   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of water extract on silica gel  'G' plate using n-butanol : Acetic acid :  
Water (40:10:50) shows nine spots at Rf  0.19, 0.23, 0.24, 0.27, 0.36, 0.40, 0.53, 0.72  
and 0.89 on spraying with 10% alcoholic sulphuric acid  and heating the plate for 15  
minutes at 110oC.
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  α- eleostearic acid, 2-acetyl-5-chloropyrrole.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara, Pittahara, Ras¡yana, Rucikara, Vra¸a¿odhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Hiraka Ras¡yana, Visan¡¿aka Yoga (Ayurved Prakash),  
Kakadan¢  Taila,  K¡l¡gn¢rudra  Rasa,  Sann¢p¡ta  
Vidhvanisa Rasa, Candrarudra Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  A¿mar¢, Ar¿a, áv¡sa, Hikk¡, Jvara, K¡mal¡, K¡sa, KÀaya, M£trak
¤cchra,  Madhumeha,  Netraroga,  SarpaviÀa,  Visarpa,  
SarpaviÀavik¡ra, Rakt¡r¿a, áiroroga 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
8131. Karnasphota (Sd) 
KARÛASPHOÙË (Seed) 
Kar¸aspho¶¡ consists of the seed of Cardiospermum halicacabum Linn. (Fam. 
Sapindaceae), commonly found as a weed throughout India, ascending upto 1,200 m. in the  
North West Himalayas.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:áakakralata (S.y.), K¡k¡dan¢, K¡kamardanik¡, K¡katikt¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Jyotishmati (of Bengal) 
English:Ballon Vine, Heart's Pea 
Gujrati  :Bodha, Kapaalphodi, Nayaphatki, Shivajaala 
Hindi    :Kaanphuti, Lataaphataki 
Kannada:Kanakayya 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Ulinna 
Marathi:Fatphati, Kaanphuti, Khiljala 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Modikkottan, Mudukkottan, Mudakkarutana(Siddha) 
Telugu  :Vekkudutiga 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
 Seeds are about 4 to 6 mm, subglobose, black, shiny with a whitish scar of aril,  
nutty flavour; no odour.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows an outermost thick yellowish layer of cuticle; testa shows a single  
layer of radially elongated, brown and thick walled palisade like cells showing linea  
lucida and with stellately lobed lumen as seen in surface view; a wide zone of sclereids  
with  thick  walled  highly  sinuous,  light  yellow  to  yellowish-brown  lignified  cells  
showing  radiating  canals  on  their  walls  in  surface  view;  tegmen  consists  of  
parenchyamatous cells; ground tissue of the embryo consists of angular to hexagonal  
parenchyma cells with oil globules; starch grains absent.
Powder - Powder light brown in colour, with black fragments of the seed coat and has  
the taste and odour of cucurbitaceous seed with a nutty flavour; shows surface view of  
82palisade layer with hexagonal outline and stellately lobed lumen, surface view of the  
much sinuous sclereid layer and oil globules.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     21   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Fixed oil                                  Not less than         20  percent, Appendix  2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of methanolic extract on silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick) using toluene :  
ethyl acetate : diethyl amine (85:15:0.5) shows under UV (366 nm) fluorescent spots at  
Rf. 0.10 (white), 0.21 (blue) and 0.70 (blue). After spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric  
acid reagent and heating the plate at 105oC for ten minutes spots appear at Rf. 0.15  
(blue), 0.34 (greenish blue), 0.44 (bluish black), 0.64 (blue) and 0.71 (blue). T.L.C. of  
the methanolic extract using butanol : acetic acid : water (6:1:2) after spraying with  
anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid reagent shows spots at Rf. 0.08 (green), 0.15 (green), 0.23  
(green), 0.28 (purple), 0.38 (green), 0.47 (pink), 0.53 (yellowish green), 0.83 (purple)  
and 0.93 (purple). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  -   Fixed oil.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Medhya, V¡tahara, ViÀaghna, Mutrala, Ke¿ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   -  Ëmatis¡ran¡¿aka Yoga, V¡s¡dilepa, N¡gar¡di Taila,  
Lau¿un¡di KaÀ¡ya 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  á£la, áopha, Jvara, P¡¸·u, V¤ddhi, Sandhi-Vata, Graha B¡dh¡,  
Bh£tab¡dh¡, ViÀab¡dh¡ 
DOSE  -  1-2 g.   
   
  
8332. Karnasphota (Rt) 
KARÛASPHOÙË (Root) 
Kar¸aspho¶¡  consists  of  the  root  of  Cardiospermum  halicacabum  Linn.  (Fam. 
Sapindaceae), commonly found as a weed throughout India, ascending upto 1200 m. in the  
North Western Himalayas.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:áakakralata (S.y.), K¡k¡dan¢, K¡kamardanik¡, K¡katikt¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Jyotishmati 
English:Ballon Vine, Heart's Pea 
Gujrati  :Bodha, Kapaalphodi, Shivajaala, Nayaphataki 
Hindi    :Kaanphuti, Lataaphataki 
Kannada:Kanakayya 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Ulinna 
Marathi:Fatphati 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Modikkottan, Mudakkarutana(Siddha), Mudukkottan 
Telugu  :Vekkudutiga 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Tap root, thick, reddish-brown, hard, woody, branched rootlets, 2 to 5 mm thick.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows outermost 3 or 4 layers of cork, cells of which are flattened and  
crushed, followed by a single layered cork cambium, followed by a cortex 10 to 15  
layers deep, with cells compactly arranged and laterally elongated; endodermis single  
layered; phloem present, cambium 2 or 3 layered thick, xylem contain vessels of various  
diameters, medullary rays uniseriate, protoxylem points discernible among collapsed  
cells of pith.
Powder- Light brown. Fibres and pitted vessels are seen. 
84IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C of methanolic extract on silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick) using phenol :  
water (3:1) shows spots at Rf 0.06 (pinkish brown), 0.17 (pinkish brown), 0.22 (greyish  
green), 0.29 (brown), 0.34 (greyish green) and 0.46 (purple) after spraying with 10%  
ethanolic-sulphuric acid reagent. 
 
CONSTITUENTS  -   
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :M£trala,  Kapha¿¡maka,  Ke¿ya,  Medhya,  Ras¡yanana,  V¡maka,  
V¡tahara, ViÀaghna., Virecaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Ëragvadh¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  á£la, áopha, Jvara, KuÀ¶ha, P¡¸·u, SarpaviÀa, V¤ddhi, K¡mala,  
Smr¶i  KÀaya,  Sandhiv¡ta,  M£sik¡viÀa,  Jvarayukta-K¡sa  
Indralupta, Sannip¡todara, A¿mari, Bh£ta-B¡dh¡, Grahab¡dh¡ 
DOSE  -  1-3 g. 
   
  
8533. Kattrina (Wh.Pl) 
KATTÎÛA (Whole Plant) 
Katt¤¸a  consists  of  the  whole  plant of  Cymbopogon  citratus  (DC.)  Stapf  syn: 
Andropogon citratus DC. (Fam. Poaceae), a tall tufted perennial grass cultivated in various  
parts of India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Bh£t¤¸ah, Jamb¢rat¤¸ah, Guhyb¢ja, Bhut¢ka 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Gandhatrun, Gandhabenaa 
English:Lemon grass 
Gujrati  :Lilichaa 
Hindi    :Gandhatrun, Harichaaya 
Kannada:Majjigahullu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Chennanampullu, Incippullu, Vasanappullu 
Marathi:Hirvaa Chahaa, Olaa Chahaa, Paatichahaa  
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Gandhatrun, Sharbaan 
Tamil   :Vasanaipillu 
Telugu  :Nimmagaddi, Vasana gaddi 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Fibrous, adventitious, 5 to 10 mm in length, 0.2 to 0.7 mm in thickness.
Rhizome -  Irregular, dark brown in colour, narrow internodes present 4 to 9 cm in  
length, 1.5 to 2 cm in diameter.
Stem - Pale yellow, hollow, 4 to 10 cm in length, 1 to 3 cm in diameter.
Leaf -  Leaves glaucous, linear, parallel veined, about 90 cm in length, 2 to 3 cm in  
width, conspicuous midrib present, apex pointed, margin entire, with sheathing base and  
a ligule at its base; lemon odour, taste bitter.
b) Microscopic 
Root - Epiblema or piliferous layer uniseriate with compact tabular cells; unicellular root  
hairs present; beneath epidermis 1 to 3 layered exodermis of cells with thick walls  
86present; cortex cells with intercellular spaces; barrel shaped cells of endodermis and  
several layered sclerified pericycle; vascular tissue with alternating strands of xylem and  
phloem, xylem exarch; pith parenchymatous with intercellular spaces.
Rhizome  -  T.S.  shows  outer  epidermal  layer  of  rectangular  parenchymatous  cells  
followed by 5 to 7 layered sclerenchymatous hypodermis; lysigenous cavities present in  
the hypodermis; below the hypodermis, a broad zone of ground tissue consisting of thin  
walled parenchymatous cells with small intercellular spaces; vascular bundles scattered  
in  the  ground  tissue;  concentric, amphivasal,  enclosed  by  sclerenchymatous  sheath;  
rosette shaped calcium oxalate crystals present in the cortex.
Stem -  T.S. shows thick cuticle followed by uniseriate epidermis and a cortex several  
layers deep; scattered concentric, amphivasal vascular bundles present in the ground  
tissue, with the larger ones towards centre, and smaller ones towards periphery; cortical  
bundles present.
Leaf -
Midrib - T.S. shows an upper and lower epidermis consisting of a single layer of cells  
with  stomata  and  trichomes;  regularly  distributed  sclerenchymatous  patches  present  
adjacent to both epidermis; ground tissue consist of non-uniform angular cells with  
intercellular spaces; vascular bundles surrounded by one or two layered bundle sheath  
and parenchymatous cells storing starch; phloem towards the lower epidermis and xylem  
towards  the  upper  epidermis;  phloem  has  sieve-tubes  and  companion  cells;  xylem  
consists of pitted metaxylem vessels which are oval in shape; tracheids present, xylem  
parenchyma scanty.
Lamina - T.S. shows a cuticle, an upper and lower epidermis composed of single layer of  
cells with bulliform cells, stomata and bristly trichomes; mesophyll with only spongy  
parenchyma; the narrow guard cells of the stomata are associated with subsidiary cells.  
Small  silica cells filled with silica, solidified into bodies of various shapes, and cells  
with suberised walls called cork cells occur in pairs which alternate with elongated  
epidermal cells; lower epidermis with oval shaped stomata arranged in a parallel manner.
Powder -  Powder green in colour with strong lemon odour and bitter taste, shows oil  
cells, fibres, rosette shaped calcium oxalate crystals, pitted and reticulate vessels, pitted  
and scalariform vessels, surface view of epidermis with stomata, trichome, cork cells,  
bristle and silica cells.
87IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of essential oil extracted by Clevenger apparatus on silica gel 'G' plate (0.2  
mm thick) using toluene : ethyl acetate (93:7) shows under UV (254 nm) spots at Rf.  
0.07 (light green) and 0.47 (dark green). After spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid  
reagent spots appear at Rf. 0.05 (blue), 0.08 (bluish yellow), 0.19 (dark blue), 0.47  
(blue), 0.52 (pink), 0.60 (light pink), 0.70 (purple) and 0.74 (purple).
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Essential oil containing citral as major component besides geraniol  
and other terpenes. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :CakÀuÀya, D¢pana, Kaphahara, Stanyajanana, V¡tahara, ViÀaghna, á
¢tapra¿amana, Recana, Mukhasodhana, Av¤Àya, R£cik¡raka, V¡mihara  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  M¡Àabal¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  áv¡sa, Bh£tab¡dh¡, D¡ha, Dadru, K¡sa, K¤mi, KuÀ¶ha, Udara,  
Arocaka, Sant¡pa, Vami, Grahab¡dha, Udarda. 
DOSE  -  3-6 g.   
   
  
8834. Kebuka (Rz.) 
KEBUKA(Rhizome) 
Kebuka consists of the dried rhizome of  Costus speciosus  (Koerning ex Retz.)  
Smith. (Fam. Zingiberaceae), a herb commonly found in sub-Himalayan tract extending  
between Kangra to Arunachal Pradesh and also in Western Ghats.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Kemhuka, Kebuka, Kemuka, Kembu 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Kevu 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Kebu, Kemuk, Kemuaa 
Kannada:Chenglavaa-Koshtu, Changalvakoshtu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Channakkilannu, Channakkuvva 
Marathi:Pevaa 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Koshtam 
Telugu  :Chenglavaa-Koshtu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Tuberous rhizome, horizontally branched, 4 to 6 cm long and 2 to 3 cm thick;  
outer surface grey to dark brown, longitudinal wrinkles and small circular leaf scars on  
upper surface; numerous nipple-shaped buds present throughout its length; numerous  
slender roots occurs along with rhizome, possesses rootlets which makes it slightly  
rough; fracture, short fibrous and hard, odourless and tasteless.
b) Microscopic 
Rhizome- Rhizome consists of 6 to 10 layers of stratified cork cells, followed by ground  
tissue; 10 to 12 layers of cortex below the cork layers are more compactly arranged than  
the remaining layers; cells of the cortex filled with sac-shaped starch grains; starch grain  
measuring about 35 to 68 µ m long and 26 to 38 µ m wide, hilum eccentric, striations  
not visible; endodermis well marked. A large number of vascular bundles scattered  
throughout the ground tissue, but within the endodermis vascular bundles are closer to  
each other; each bundle has xylem almost surrounded by phloem; sclerenchymatous,  
89fibrous sheath surrounds each of the vascular bundles; clusters of calcium oxalate found  
in some cells of the ground tissue.
Powder-  Light to dark brown, easily flowable with fine to coarse texture; crystals of  
calcium oxalate prismatic and clusters; granules of sac-shaped starch are mostly simple  
but rarely compound form also found; thick walled fibres, both simple and septa, several  
show marks and adjacent cells appressed against them; tips blunt in shorter, and pointed  
in longer fibres; vessels both pitted and reticulate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   20   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform : Glacial  
acetic acid : Methanol : Water (5:2:2:1) shows under UV light (365 nm) a fluorescent  
zone  at  Rf.  0.95  (greenish  yellow).  On  sparying  with  Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric  acid  
reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 105oC, nine spots appear at Rf. 0.11,  
0.22, 0.33, 0.49, 0.59, 0.72, 0.79, 0.87 (all green) and 0.95 (blue)
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Steroidal Saponins such as (Tigogenin and diosgenin).
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :P¡cana, Garbh¡s¡ya Sankocaka, Gr¡hi, H¤dya, K¤mighna, Kaphahara,  
Pittahara, Rakta¿odhaka, D¢pana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  K¤mighna Kv¡tha C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  Agnim¡ndya, ál¢pada, Ar¿a, Grahan¢, Jvara, K¡mal¡, K¡sa,  
KuÀ¶a, Prameha, Raktavik¡ra, Kaphapittaja Vikara, K¤miroga,  
áv¢tra, Kaphaja, Mutrak¤cchra 
DOSE  -  3-6 g (after purification). 
9035. Khaskhasa(Sd.) 
KHAKHASA (Seed) 
Khakhasa consists of seed of  Papaver somniferum  Linn. (Fam. Papaveraceae), a  
glaucous erect annual herb cultivated under State control in certain areas of Rajasthan,  
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Khasatilah, Ëph£kam, Kh¡khastilah, Kh¡khasah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Aaphim, Postadaanaa, Postabeej 
English:Opium, Poppy Seeds 
Gujrati  :Khaskhas 
Hindi    :Apheem, Postadaanaa, Khaskhas, Khasabija 
Kannada:Gasgase, Aapheen, Aphini 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Avin, Karappu, Kashkash, Aalan 
Marathi:Khaskhas 
Oriya   :Aapu 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Kasakash, Posttakkaai, Avinee 
Telugu  :Gasgashaalu, Nallamandu 
Urdu    :Apheem 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds are small, about 1.0 to 1.15 mm long, round to reniform or kidney shaped,  
generally  dirty  white,  occasionally  found  mingled  with  a  few  brownish  or  greyish  
coloured seeds; surface coarsely reticulated, larger network enclosing within, numerous  
irregular smaller reticulations; hilum and micropyle are situated in the notch on the  
lateral side near the smaller end; seeds are inodorous and oily in taste.
b) Microscopic 
Testa is composed of 5 distinct cell layers, outermost layer of epidermal cells  
corresponding  to  the  surface  reticulations;  the  next  layer  consists  of  polygonal  or  
elongated cells containing minute microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate and below  
there is a single layer of thick walled unlignified elongated cells; this layer is followed  
by a single layer of thin walled cells; testa is limited internally by a single layer or  
elongated palisade like cells with reticulately thickened walls; central portion of the seed  
is occupied by polygonal parenchymatous cells of endosperm containing abundant oil  
drops and aleurone grains;  embryo is slightly curved, radicle rod like, bearing 2, or  
91rarely  3,  cotyledonary  leaves,  embedded  in  the  oily  endosperm;   contents  of  the  
cotyledon are similar to those of endosperm.
Powder - Light brown, coarse, not free flowing, clot or ball forming, under microscope  
exhibits large fatty oil droplets, characteristic penta to hexagonal testa cells, endosperm  
and reticulate layer cells; cells containing characteristic crystal and fibres also present.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     13   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Fixed oil                                  Not less than     19   per cent, Appendix    2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of hexane extract on silica gel 60 F 254 plate using Toluene : Acetone  
(93:07) shows five spots at Rf  0.25, 0.39, 0.50, 0.76 and 0.83 on spraying with Vanillin-
Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for 15 minutes at 110oC.
 
 CONSTITUENTS  -  Fixed oil containing esters of linoleic, palmitic, oleic acids.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :Balya, Stambhana, V¡tahara, V¤Àya, Vedan¡sth¡pana, R£cya, Var¸ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Abhy¡di Gutika, Abhrak¡di Vati, Asvani Kum¡r Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Atis¡ra, K¡sa 
DOSE  -  5-10 g 
   
  
9236. Khatmi (Rt) 
KHATMÌ(Root) 
Khatm¢consists  of  the  root  of  Althaea  officinalis  Linn.  (Fam.  Malvaceae)  a  
perennial, uniformly downy herb, occurring in Kashmir region. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Khatm¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:Marsh Mallow 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Khatmi 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Khatmi 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Khatmi 
Telugu  :Khatmi 
Urdu    :Aslua Khitmi, Reshah-e-Khatmi 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Roots 0.2 to 3 cm in diameter, light brown in colour, strongly longitudinally  
furrowed,  often  spirally  twisted;  fracture,  short,  texture  rough,  internally  yellowish  
white; odour, pleasant; taste, sweet and mucilaginous.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. root circular in outline; cork 8 to 12 cells broad, radially arranged flattened  
cells; cortex broad, loosely arranged, parenchymatous, cells filled with mucilage; small  
patches  of  lignified  fibres  present;  large  number  of  schizogenous  and  lysigenous  
mucilage canals present; phloem well developed consisting of sieve tubes, companion  
cells and phloem parenchyma filled with mucilage; cambium 2 to 3 celled, xylem diffuse  
porous,  made  up  of  vessels,  tracheids,  fibres,  and  tracheidal  fibres,  vessels  mostly  
solitary - filled with tyloses at some places, medullary rays 3 to 5 cells deep; rosette  
crystals of calcium oxalate present in cortical, phloem and xylem region; cells contain  
mucilage, stained red with 1% ruthenium red, and deep yellow with potassium hydroxide  
solution; most of the parenchymatous cells contain starch grains, polygonal to rounded, 5  
93to 20 µm, most grains less than 12 µm in diameter, simple, hilum circular or a 2 to 5  
rayed cleft lamellae indistinct. 
Powder - Powder white to light yellow, sweet in taste; under the microscope numerous  
fragments of parenchyma, the cells containing mucilage and starch grains polygonal to  
rounded, 5-20 µm, most grains less than 12 µm in diameter, simple, hilum circular or a  
2-5 rayed cleft lamellae indistinct; occasionally small rosette crystals of calcium oxalate,  
group  of  sclerenchymatous  cells,  vessels  measuring  113  to  262  µm  long,  fibres 
measuring 519 to 1038  µm long and 9 to 19  µm broad; mucilaginous canals; when  
treated with 50% HNO3 turns yellowish-orange and emits yellow fluorescence under UV  
254 nm; with 50% KOH, it emits light yellow fluorescence under UV 254 nm, while  
with 1 N-NaOH in methanol orangeish brown colour is seen in day light.  
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Moisture content                        Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.9. 
Total ash                                  Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid insoluble ash                      Not less than     1.5  per cent, Appendix    2.2.4. 
Alcohol soluble extractive         Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water soluble extractive           Not less than     21   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using toluene : ethyl acetate : methanol (80 : 20 : 0.05) shows under UV (366 nm)  
fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.12, 0.27, 0.33, 0.82. On spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric  
acid and heating for ten minutes at 120oC, shows spots at Rf. 0.12, 0.18, 0.43, 0.47, 0.69  
and 0.82.
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   Galacturonic  acid,  galactose,  glucose,  xylose  &  
rhamnose,polysaccharide  althaea  mucilage-O,  
asparaginene,  betaine,  lecithin   and  phytosterol,  
polysaccharides.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Picchila, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :M£trala,  Pittahara,  V¡tahara,  Vedan¡sth¡pana,  áleÀmas¡raka,  
Kaphaghna 
94 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Gojihv¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  M£trad¡ha, D¡ha, K¡sa, M£trak¤cchra, Prati¿y¡ya, Raktapitta, M
£tr¡¿aya¿otha, Ka¸¶haroga, Ëntra¿otha 
DOSE  -  3 -6 g. 
   
  
9537. Khatmi (Seed) 
KHATMÌ(Seed) 
Khatm¢ seeds or Tukhm-e-khatmi, consist of dried seeds of  Althaea officinalis  
Linn. (Fam. Malvaceae), a perennial, uniformly downy herb occurring in Kashmir region. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Khatm¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:Marsh Mallow 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Khatmi bija 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Khatmi 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Khatmi 
Telugu  :Khatmi 
Urdu    :Bajrul Khitmi, Khatmee, Tukhma-e-Khatmee 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
The seeds are small to moderate size, approximately 6 mm, usually brownish-
black, reniform, rugose, hairy at margins; become mucilagenous when soaked in water . 
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows testa - an outer multicellular layer comprising of outer most thick  
walled epidermis with multicellular, 2 to 6 armed stellate and some unicellular hairs,  
longest being near the micropyle; this is followed by 4 to 10 layers of parenchymatous  
cells  several  with  rosette  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate,  interrupted  by  schizogenous  
mucilage canals; the inner epidermis of testa is also thick walled. Tegmen two layered;  
outer tegmen - 4 to 6 cells deep, lignified 2 to 6 armed stellate hairs present also on it,  
this easily detached from the inner tegmen; inner tegmen  - 4 to 6 cells deep, the outer  
being a row of palisade-like malphighian cells followed by a slightly thick walled, non-
lignified two layered hypodermis of cells with their inner periclinal walls concave (i); 2  
to 3 layered parenchymatous mesophyll; the inner epidermis is a layer of thin walled  
cells with rod like lignified thickening scattered on the anticlinal walls; endosperm cells  
96filled with starch grains which are polygonal to rounded, 5 to 20  µ m in size, hilum 
circular or showing a 2 to 5 rayed cleft, lamellae indistinct; ovule campylotropous; seeds  
of Althaea rosea do not show the type of hairs present in A. officinalis, but have mostly 
unicellular hairs. 
Powder -  Powder brownish-black in colour, odourless, mucilaginous and sweetish in  
taste; shows elongated thick walled ridged malphighian cells; in surface view they are  
hexagonal showing wall thickenings; patches of parenchyma with mucilage and starch  
grains, polygonal to rounded, 5 to 20 µ m, hilum circular, or with a 2 to 5 rayed cleft,  
lamellae indistinct; rosette crystals of calcium oxalate and stellate hairs; a small amount  
of powder on microscopic slide turns maroon with 50 % H2SO4  and black with 1N-
NaOH in amylacetate. When treated with 1% ruthenium red, powder becomes pink in  
colour showing the presence of mucilage.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     18   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using toluene : ethyl acetate : methanol (85 : 15 : 0.5) shows under UV (366 nm) blue  
fluorescent at Rf. 0.18, 0.33 and 0.67. On spraying with Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric acid  
and heating the plate for ten minutes at 120oC, spots appear at Rf. 0.10 (grey), 0.18  
(grey), 0.32 (green), 0.37 (navy blue), 0.57 (greyish blue) and 0.67 (greyish blue).
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   Glucose,  sucrose,  galactose  &  mannose,  linoleic  acid;  
isobutylalcohol, limonene, phellandrene, γ- toluerldehyde, citral, terpeneol, β- sitosterol.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Picchila, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :M£trala,  Pittahara,  V¡tahara,  Vedan¡sth¡pana,  áleÀma  Kal¡  
Snehakara, áleÀma S¡raka 
 
97IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Gojihv¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  K¡sa, M£trak¤cchra, Prati¿y¡ya, M£trad¡ha, Ka¸tharoga. 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
9838. Khubkalan (Sd) 
KHÍBKALËN (Seed) 
Kh£bkal¡n is the seed of Sisymbrium irio Linn.  (Fam.  Brassicaceae), an annual or  
biennial herb found in Kashmir, Punjab and Haryana and from Rajasthan to U.P. especially  
on moist soil.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:-- 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:Hedge-Mustard, London Rocket 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Khub Kalaan, Khaaksee 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Ranteekhee 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Janglisarson, Maktrusa, Maktaroosaa 
Tamil   :-- 
Telugu  :Jeevakamu 
Urdu    :Khubakalan 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds  more  or  less  ellipsoid,  minute,  size  about  a  mm,  orangish-brown,  
mucilaginous with warty surface; odour, pungent like mustard oil and taste like bitter  
mustard oil.
b) Microscopic 
T.S.  of  seed  shows  seed  coat  with  six  layers,  outermost  a  single  layer  of  
epidermis of rectangular, flattened and thin walled cells ranging from 30 to 50  µ in 
length containing colourless, concentrically striated mucilage; a two-cell deep layer of  
parenchymatous cells, a single row of sclerenchymatous cells with their radial and inner  
tangential walls thickened, a single-cell layer of pigment, a single cell layer of aleurone  
grains, followed by crushed parenchymatous cells; cotyledons contain aleurone grains  
and oil globules; embryo folded; starch absent. 
99Powder -  Brown, with pungent mustard oil smell, shows oil globules; aleurone grains  
containing  crystalloids,  globoids  and  sclerenchymatous  cells;  with  ruthenium  red  
mucilage turns pink.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     22   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Fixed oil                                  Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick) using  
butanol : acetic acid : methanol (60:10:20) shows under UV (254 nm) green spots at Rf.  
0.07, 0.17, 0.23, 0.29, 0.55 and 0.87. After spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid  
reagent and heating the plate at 105oC for ten minutes spots appear at Rf. 0.05 (green),  
0.09 (green), 0.13 (light green), 0.21 (dark green), 0.28 (purple), 0.40 (purple), 0.76  
(light purple) and 0.93 (dark purple). After spraying with Dragendorff's reagent, one spot  
appears at Rf. 0.24 (bright orange).
CONSTITUENTS  -  Fixed oil and Isorhamnetin.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u 
Guna :Guru, Picchila, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Balya, V¡tahara, Kaphahar, Svedakara, áothahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Gojihv¡di Kv¡tha Cur¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  áv¡sa, Jvara, K¡sa, V¡tajanya Vik¡ra, Svarabheda, Daurbalya,  
Kaphavik¡ra. 
DOSE  -  3-6 g.   
   
  
10039. Kodravah(Grain) 
KODRAVAH (Grain) 
Kodravah  consists  of  dehusked  and  well-matured  caryopsis  of  Paspalum  
scrobiculatum Linn. (Fam. Poaceae), an annual grass 60 to 90 cm tall, cultivated in the plains  
of India for its grains; newly gathered grains with husks are poisonous; husks are removed  
prior to use or powdering.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Korad£Àah, Korad£Àakah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Kodo aadhaan 
English:Kodo Millet 
Gujrati  :Kodro, Kodaraa 
Hindi    :Kodon, Kodava, Kododhaam 
Kannada:Harak, Harike 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Varaku 
Marathi:Kodra, Harik, Kodru 
Oriya   :Kodua 
Punjabi:Kodon, Kodra 
Tamil   :Varagu 
Telugu  :Arikelu, Kiraruga 
Urdu    :Kodon 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Grain oval to rounded in shape, plano-convex and up to about 4 mm in length;  
pericarp brown, adherent to seeds, can be removed by rubbing; as seen under hand lens,  
on the convex side of caryopsis, there is one central line, and on the plane surface, three  
lines; inside pericarp is a shiny brown seed; seeds possess three prominent ridges on the  
convex side and in between these ridges, fine striations are present; plane side of the  
seed shows finely striated oval central depression, apical side pointed. 
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows thick pericarp composed of 6 to 10 layers of cells; outermost layer  
elongated with outer and inner walls lignified; below this, cells have thickened walls,  
and a much-reduced lumen; testa not well defined and composed of crushed cells; cells  
of scutellum irregular in shape and usually contain oil droplets; outer cells of endosperm  
101contain aleurone grains; endosperm cells thin walled, polygonal, large and fully packed  
with penta to hexagonal starch grains, usually 8 to 20 µ.
Powder - Brown, fine, free flowing, characterized by the presence of characteristic thick  
walled, pericarp cells, penta to hexagonal starch grains, which are isolated, or in groups.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of ethanol extract on silica gel 'G' plate using Chloroform : Methanol  
(95:05) shows five spots at Rf  0.25, 0.38, 0.55, 0.67 and 0.89 on spraying with 10%  
alcoholic sulphuric acid and heating the plate for 15 minutes at 110oC.
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Hydrocarcons hentriacontanol, hentriacontanone; sterols such as β-
sitosterol, campestrol.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Gr¡hi, Kaphahara, Pittahara, Lekhana, ViÀaghana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  N¡d¢vra¸ahara Ëtury¡di Lepa, N¡d¢vra¸ahara  tury¡di  
Taila. 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  N¡·¢vra¸a, Prameha, Raktapitta, Vra¸a, Atisthaulya, Annadrava¿
£la, Medov¤ddhi, Jalodara 
DOSE  -  50-100 g. 
   
  
10240. Kshirakakoli (Bulb) 
KâÌRAKËKOLÌ (Bulb) 
KÀ¢rak¡kol¢ consists of the dried whole bulb of  Fritillaria roylei  Hook. (Fam. 
Liliaceae), a glabrous herb 6-24 m in height, found in Western temperate Himalayas from  
Kumaon to Kashmir at an altitude of 2500-4000 m; processed by boiling.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:áukl¡, KÀ¢rvallik¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:Fritillary 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Kshira, Kakoli 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Kshira, Kakoli 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Kshira, Kakoli 
Telugu  :Kshira, Kakoli 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Whole bulbs are hard, conical 1.5 to 2.5 in width and 3 to 3.5 cm in length,  
transluscent  with  slight  longitudinal  ridges,  covered  with  hard  membranous  scales  
arranged in a concentric manner and breaking readily with a short fracture; cut surface  
white to creamish-yellow and starchy; scars of adventitious roots seen; odour, pleasant;  
taste, bitter.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. of bulb shows concentric layers of scale leaves; axis of bulb show three  
concentric layers of scale leaves, with an outer and inner epidermis consisting of single  
layered parenchymatous cells with mucilage; cuticle of both epidermis is slightly wavy  
and horny, mesophyll consists of 6 to 9 layered hexagonal parenchyma cells; starch  
grains gelatinised; raphides ranging from 100 to 230 µ in length are also present in the  
mesophyll;  surface  view  of  upper  epidermis  show  compactly  arranged  rectangular,  
elongated thin walled cells. 
103Powder-  Powder creamish with pleasant smell; raphides present; powder treated with  
ruthenium red, mucilage turns bright pink.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C of the methanolic extract on silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick) using  
butanol : acetic acid : water (6:1:2)  shows under UV (366 nm) spots at Rf. 0.11, 0.18,  
0.29, 0.33, 0.37, 0.45, 0.49, 0.62 and 0.93 (all fluorescent blue) under UV 254 nm spots  
at Rf. 0.33, 0.37, 0.62 and 0.93 (all green). After spraying with Dragendorff's reagent  
orange spots appear at Rf. 0.33 and 0.37.
 
CONSTITUENTS   -   Alkaloids  Kashimirine  (imperialine),  peimine,  Peimisine,  
Propeimine, Peimiphine and Peimitidine.
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :Pittahara,  Ras¡yana,  V¡tahara,  V¤Àya,  B¤Æha¸a,  áukravardhaka,  
Stanyajanna, Kaphakara, T¤À¡hara, Basti Vi¿odhan¢, ViÀaghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Da¿am£lariÀ¶a, áiv¡gutik¡, B¤hataphala, Gh¤ta, B¤hat-
Gu·uc¢ Taila, B¤hatm¡Àa Taila, M¡nasamitra Va¶ika,  
Rasar¡ja Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  áoÀa, D¡ha, H¤droga, Jvara, K¡sa, KÀaya, RaktadoÀa, Raktapitta,  
Raktaroga,  ávas¡,  V¡atarakta,  Yoni  Vy¡pad,  V¡tavy¡dhi,  
Vatapittaruj¡ 
DOSE  -  3-5 g in the powder form. 
   
  
10441. Kshiravidari (Bulb) 
KâHÌRAVIDËRÌ (Root) 
KÀh¢ravid¡r¢ is the dried root of Ipomoea digitata Linn. syn. Ipomoea paniculata  
(Linn.) R. Br. (Fam. Convolvulaceae); a perennial climber, distributed throughout the  
warm and moist regions of India. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:IkÀugandh¡, IkÀuvall¢, Payasvini, Dirghakand¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Bhuh Kumdaa, Bhooi Kumhdaa 
English:Giant potato 
Gujrati  :Vidaaree Kand 
Hindi    :Vidaaree Kanda, Bhuh Kumdaa, Bhui Kumbhadaa 
Kannada:Nelkumbal, Naadakumbala 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Paalmutakku 
Marathi:Bhui Kohalaa 
Oriya   :Bhuin Kakhaaru 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Nilappuchani, Paalmudamgi 
Telugu  :Paalagummudu, Nelagummudu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
The root consists of thick pieces of different sizes, usually 2 to 8 mm in diameter;  
outer surface brownish and rough due to the presence of longitudinal fissures, ridges and  
numerous circular lenticels; core light brown and fibrous; fracture, fibrous, odourless  
and sweetish in taste.
b) Microscopic 
Root- Root shows 6 to 9 layers of thin walled cork cells, externally covered by  
rhytidoma; phelloderm composed of 8 to10 layers of cells, thin walled and filled with  
starch grains, individual starch grain rounded to irregular in shape, variable in size  
measuring about 13 to 24 µm, with distinct centric hilum; rosettes of calcium oxalate  
present; secondary phloem consists of companion cells, sieve tube elements and phloem  
parenchyma, traversed by uni- or biseriate medullary ray; numerous resin ducts and  
starch  grains  occur  in  the  secondary  phloem;  secondary  xylem  consists  of  xylem  
105parenchyma,  xylem  vessels,  xylem  fibres  and  tracheids;  vessels  large  in  size  and  
numerous.
Powder- Light to dark brown, fine to coarse texture; simple and compound starch grains  
of variable size, crystals of calcium oxalate in prismatic and cluster form; pitted vessels;  
tracheids; parenchymatous cells with simple pits and long fibres with wide lumen and  
pointed ends. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract of dried root powder on Silica gel 'G' plate (0.2  
mm thick) using Petroleum ether: Diethyl ether: Glacial acetic acid (8: 2: 0.1) under UV  
light (365 nm) shows two fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.24 and 0.42 (both green). On  
spraying with Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for 15 minutes at  
105oC, three spots appear at Rf. 0.18, 0.55 and 0.95 (all black).
CONSTITUENTS  -  Glycosides, steroids, tannins and fixed oil. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :B¤Æha¸a, Balya, Ras¡yana, Svarya, V¡tahara, V¤Àya, Var¸ya, Atim
£trala, Stanyajanana, J¢van¢ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  á¢v¡gutik¡ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Raktavik¡ra, Vra¸a, Stanyavik¡ra, Pittaja á£la, Mah¡v¡tavy¡dhi,  
M£traroga, Bhagna 
DOSE  -  5 - 10 g.   
   
  
10642. Kulanjan(Rz) 
KULAØJANA (Rhizome) 
Kulaµjana  consists  of  dried  rhizome  of  Alpinia  galanga  Willd.  (Fam. 
Zingiberaceae), a plant upto about 2.0 m high bearing perennial rhizome, growing in  
eastern Himalayas and southwest India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Sugandhm£la, Malaya, Vac¡, Sth£lagranthih, Mah¡bhar¢ Vac¡, R¡sn¡  
(South) 
Assamese:Khulanjaana 
Bengali:Kulanjan, Kurachi Vach 
English:Greater galangal, Javagalangal 
Gujrati  :Kulinjan Jaanu, Kolinjan 
Hindi    :Kulanjan, Kulinjan 
Kannada:Doddarasagadde, Dhoomraasmi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Aratta, Ciffaratta 
Marathi:Kulinlan, Koshta Kulinjan, Mothe Kolanjan 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Arattai, Sittarattai 
Telugu  :Dumparaastramu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - The roots are adventitious, in groups, fibrous, persistent in dried rhizomes,  
about 0.5 to 2 cm long and 0.1 to 0.2 cm in diameter and yellowish-brown in colour.
Rhizome - Rhizome cylindrical, branched, 2 to 8 cm in diameter, longitudinally ridged  
with prominent rounded warts (remnants of roots) marked with fine annulations; scaly  
leaves arranged circularly; externally reddish-brown, internally orange yellow in colour;  
fracture, hard and fibrous; fracture, surface rough; odour, pleasant and aromatic; spicy  
and sweet in taste.
b) Microscopic 
Root - T.S. of root circular in outline, single layered epidermis with barrel shaped cells  
having unicellular root hairs, hypodermis 3 or 4 cells deep and sclerenchymatous, cortex  
parenchymatous, many cells deep, with well developed intercellular spaces; endodermis  
showing prominent casparian strips and 'v' shaped thickening, followed by many celled  
107sclerenchymatous  pericycle;  xylem  and  phloem  in  separate  radial  strands;  centre  
occupied with a parenchymatous pith. 
Rhizome - T.S. of young rhizome circular in outline; epidermal cells small and angular,  
thick cuticle present, rhizome differentiated into a wide cortex and a central cylinder,  
both regions having irregularly scattered vascular bundles, each vascular bundle with a  
prominent fibrous sheath; inner limit of cortex marked by rectangular parenchymatous  
cells; stele with irregular, closely placed vascular bundles towards periphery, root traces  
present, schizogenous canals and oil cells with suberized walls found in cortex and in  
central region; most of the parenchymatous cells filled with starch grains which are  
ellipsoidal to ovoid, sometimes beaked, simple, 10 to 64 µm, hilum eccentric, circular or  
crescent shaped at the broad end, the narrow beak-like end become black when stained  
with dil. iodine water and chlor-zinc iodide but the remaining part become light blue or  
brown. Macerated prepration shows vessels 95 to 710 µm long and 19 to 190 µm broad, 
tracheidal fibres 68 to 920 µm long and 19 to 30 µm broad.
Powder  -  Powder  is  orange  brown  in  colour,  spicy  and  sweet  in  taste,  shows  
parenchymatous cells containing starch (as described under microscopy of rhizome), oil  
cells,  schizogenous  canals,  vessels  with  scalariform  and  reticulate  thickenings  and  
tracheidal fibres. 
IDENTIFICATION TEST -
One drop of an extract of 1 g dried powdered material with ethanol placed on  
filter paper and observed under UV light does not show fluorescence; (distinction from  
'lesser galangal' Alpinia officinarum  which gives bluish fluorescence). 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     13   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Starch                                     Not less than     22   per cent, Appendix    2.2.13. 
Essential oil                               Not less than     0.4  per cent, Appendix   2.2.10. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plates (0.2 mm thick)  
using toluene : ethyl acetate : methanol (80:20:0.4) shows under UV (366 nm) blue  
fluorescent zones of yellow, green and blue at Rf. 0.15, 0.25, 0.69 respectively. On  
spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes  
108at 120oC, spots appear at Rf. 0.15 (greyish green), 0.35 (violet), 0.48 (greyish green),  
0.63 (greyish green), 0.69 (green) and 0.91 (violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Essential oil, containing α - pinene, β - pinene, limonene, cineol,  
terpinen - 4 - ol and α - terpineol.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Guru 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :H¤dya,  Ka¸thya,  Kaphahara,  R£cya,  Svarya,  V¡tahara,  ViÀaghna,  
P¡can¢, Mukha áodhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Br¡hm¢ Va¶¢, R¡sn¡dikaÀ¡ya, R¡sn¡d¡rv¡di KaÀ¡ya,  
R¡sn¡pa´cakam,  R¡sn¡  Saptakam,  R¡sn¡¿u¸¶hy¡di  
KaÀ¡ya, R¡snaira¸·¡di KaÀ¡ya 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  áopha, áv¡sa, Hikk¡, Prati¿y¡ya, V¡tavy¡dhi, Udararoga, Kampa,  
ViÀmajvara, Kaphajak¡sa, A¿ti, Mah¡kuÀ¶ha., V¡taja á£la 
DOSE  -  1-3 g powder.  
   
  
10943. Kumbhika(Sd) 
KUMBHÌKAH(Seed) 
Kumbh¢kah consists of dried seed of Careya arborea Roxb. (Fam. Lecythidaceae), a  
medium sized deciduous tree attaining a height of 9 to 18 m. occurring throughout India  
upto an altitude of 1,500 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Sv¡dupuÀpa, Vi¶ap¢, Sthala Kumbh¢, Roma¿¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Kumbhi 
English:Kumbi 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Sthala Kumbhi 
Kannada:Daddala, Gudda, Daddippe 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Pezuntol 
Marathi:Kumbhaa 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Kumbi 
Telugu  :Dudippi 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds, exalbuminous, dark brown, oval ellipsoid, 1.5 to 2 cm long, upto one cm  
or slightly above in width; indehiscent; testa hard and wrinkled; odour, pleasant; taste,  
astringent.
b) Microscopic 
Testa  sclerenchymatous  followed  by  a  zone  of  collapsed  cells  of  outer  
integument,  inner  integument  lined  by  cuticle  on  both  sides;  outer  layers  of  both  
integuments filled with dark brown material; cotyledons of many layered, thin walled,  
polygonal parenchymatous cells, filled abundantly with starch grains and occasionally  
with oil.
Powder - Creamish-yellow to light-brown, shows fragments of cotyledon cells; scattered  
stone cells of testa, abundant starch grains, simple and round, about 5 µ.
110IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the hexane extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick) using  
petroleum ether : diethyl ether : acetic acid (9:1:0.1) shows spots at Rf. 0.14 (purple),  
0.26 (brown), 0.32 (light pink), 0.44 (pink) and 0.77 (purple) on spraying with vanillin-
sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105oC for about ten minutes.
 
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Saponins (five sapogenols- careyagenol A, B, C, D & E); sterols, α- 
spinosterol and α-spinosterone.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Gr¡h¢, Kaphahara, V¡tahara, Vra¸a Ropana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Marma Gu¶ik¡ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  K¤mi, KuÀ¶ha, N¡·¢vra¸a, Prameha, ViÀaroga, Vra¸a, V¡tika  
K¡sa, Pakv¡tis¡ra 
DOSE  -  2-6 g powder.   
   
  
11144. Latakarnja (Sd) 
LATËKARA×JA (Seed) 
Lat¡kara´ja  consists  of  seed  of  Caesalpinia  bonduc  (Linn.)  Roxb.  (Fam.  
Caesalpiniaceae), an extensive, shrubby, wild, perennial climber distributed throughout  
tropical parts of India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Kuber¡kÀa, Ka¸¶ak¢ Kara´ja 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Kaantaa Karanjaa, Naataa, Naataa Karanjaa 
English:Bonduc Nut, Fever Nut 
Gujrati  :Kaanchakaa, Kaanka 
Hindi    :Karanja, Karanjuaa, Kaantaa Karanj 
Kannada:Gajjike Kaayi, Gajkai 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kalamchikuru, Kaalanchi, Kazhinch - Kai 
Marathi:Saagar gotaa, Gajarghotaa, Gaajagaa 
Oriya   :Kotokolejaa 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Kajha shikke, Kalichchikkaai 
Telugu  :Gachchakaay 
Urdu    :Akitmakit 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds globose or rounded, smooth, shiny, 1.2 to 2.5 cm in diameter; slightly  
flattened on one side due to close pressing of adjacent seeds; hilum and micropyle close  
together; hilum surrounded by a dark area around 4 mm in diameter, usually with a  
whitish or yellowish remnant of funiculus; micropyle near the periphery of the dark area;  
seed coat greenish-grey to bluish-grey, lineate, shiny; 100 seeds weigh from 225 to 250  
g. 
b) Microscopic 
Testa shows an outer single row of radially elongated, very narrow, transluscent,  
compactly arranged cells forming a palisade layer (Malpighian layer) passing through  
which is the 'linea lucida'. These cells appear hexagonal in surface view and possess  
thick walls (rich in pectin as evident from Chloro-zinc Iodine Test); a sub-epidermal  
zone of 2 or 3 layers of thick walled bearer cells present, followed by multiple rows of  
osteosclereids, which   progressively increase in size, elongate laterally and have more  
112intercellular spaces towards the inner side; the outer few layers of these osteosclereids  
contain a brown substance; laterally elongated vascular tissues present in the lower  
region  of  this  zone. The cells  inner  to vascular  elements  gradually  compacted  and  
rounded towards the inner margin; cotyledons show an outer single layer of epidermis  
made of small, isodiametric cells, and inner parenchymatous ground tissue cells rich in  
fixed oil, and having empty cavities uniformly distributed in them.
Powder - Colour light yellow through mustard to brown, coarse and free-flowing; bitter  
in  taste  and  possessing  tamarind  -like  odour.  Parts  of  vessels  showing  scalariform  
thickenings and groups of narrow, palisade cells with light line are present; groups of  
cells of height from 150 to 250  µ the sub-epidermal layers of seed coat having 10 to 12  
µ, squarish bearer cells and upto 150  µ long osteosclereids; cotyledon cells (upto 35  µ) 
showing fixed oil when mounted in Sudan III.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     26   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     4.0  per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using toluene: ethylacetate : acetic acid (5:4.5:0.5), shows under U.V. (366 nm)  spots at  
Rf. 0.13 (Light Blue), 0.28 (Dark Blue), 0.63 (Pink), 0.92 (Pink); on spraying with  
anisaldehyde- sulphuric acid reagent and  heating the plate for ten minutes at 110o C 
spots appear at Rf 0.30(Brown), 0.64 (Bluish Purple), 0.72 (Purple), 0.80 (Purple), 0.89  
(Grey).
T.L.C. of  the  hexane  extract  on  precoated  silica gel  'G'  plate  0.2 mm  thick  using  
chloroform: ethylacetate (98:2), on spraying with anisaldehyde- sulphuric acid reagent  
and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110o C spots appear at Rf 0.03 (Yellow), 0.11  
(Greenish Blue), 0.21 (Greenish Yellow), 0.33 (Greenish Blue), 0.43 (Pale yellow), 0.55  
(Greenish Blue).
CONSTITUENTS  -  Seeds contain bitter substance phytosterenin, bonducin, saponin,  
phytosterol, fixed oil, starch and sucrose. Seeds also contain α, β, γ, δ and ζ caesalpins.
  
113PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pana,  Ërtavajanana,  Kaphahara,  Pittahara,  V¡tahara,  
Vedan¡sth¡paka, Vra¸aropa¸a 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Ëragvadh¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a, Kuber¡kÀdi Va¶¢ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  á£la, áotha, Ar¿a, áv¡sa, Chardi, Ëmav¡ta, Gulma, K¡sa, KuÀ¶ha,  
Meha, Sandhiv¡ta, Tvakroga, V¡tavik¡ra, ViÀamajvara, Vra¸a, S
£tik¡jvara, Udaras£la, Rakt¡tis¡ra, Agnim¡ndya, Prav¡hika, Yak
¤tpl¢h¡roga, K¤mi. 
DOSE  -  1-3 g. 
   
  
11445. Lavaliphala(Fr) 
LAVALÌPHALA (Fruit) 
Laval¢phala consists of dried fruit of Phyllanthus acidus (Linn.) Skeels syn. Cicca  
acida Linn. Merrill (Fam. Euphorbiaceae), a small or medium sized tree cultivated in  
gardens, and also grown as a roadside tree.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Sugandham£l¡, Laval¢, P¡n·uh, Komala Valkal¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Noyaal, Harphal 
English:Star gooseberry, Country gooseberry 
Gujrati  :Khaati Aawala, Raay aamali 
Hindi    :Harfaarevadi, Lavali 
Kannada:Karinelli 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Raaya-aawal 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Arinelli 
Telugu  :Raachayusarike 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Brownish green, globose, 1.5 to 1.8 cm dia obscurely 6 to 8 grooved, depressed at  
both ends; pieces show a highly shrivelled and wrinkled external surface, texture rough;  
odour characteristic; taste, acidic, followed by a delicately sweet taste; seed globose, 0.8  
to 1.2 cm dia.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. of mature fruit shows the epicarp with a single layer of tabular epidermis,  
covered  by  a  thin  cuticle;  numerous  sunken  stomata  scattered  on  the  epidermis;  
epidermal cells in surface view polygonal in shape with corner thickenings; mesocarp  
consists of 8 to 10 layers of polygonal cells and 6 to 8 layers of radially elongated large,  
rather thick walled parenchyma cells, most of which contain yellow pigments (mesocarp  
of Emblica officinalis  consists of mostly large polygonal cells with corner thickenings  
and have a very few pigment cells); prisms of calcium oxalate crystal and starch grains  
present in a few epidermal cells and also in a few parenchyma cells; many of the cells  
115contain yellow pigments; ramified vascular bundles scattered throughout the mesocarp  
consist of xylem and phloem, xylem composed of  tracheids and fibres; testa have  
palisade like epidermis composed of tightly packed sclereids  with pits. 
Powder -  Shows pieces of isodiametric-parenchymatous cells with yellow or brown  
colour pigment; prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; fibres; sclereids with pits; starch  
grains are fairly abundant, small and simple.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' (E. Merck grade) plate  
using Chloroform : Methanol  : Formic acid (95 : 0.5 : 0.1) shows under  UV (366 nm)  
three fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.14 (green), 0.28 (green) and 0.83 (green). On spraying  
with Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for five minutes at  
105oC six spots appear at Rf. 0.14 (orange), 0.17 (violet), 0.51 (orange), 0.66 (purple),  
0.76 (violet) and 0.91 (purple). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Triterpenoids (β- amyrin, Phyllanthol) and Gallic acid.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Amla, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa, Va¿ada 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :Gr¡h¢,  H¤dya,  Kaphahara,  Pittahara,  V¡takara,  Rakta  Stambhana,  
Rucikara  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Dr¡kÀ¡sava 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  A¿mar¢, Ar¿a, Aruci 
DOSE  -  10-20 g. 
   
  
11646. Madhulika (Rt) 
MADHÍLIKË (Root) 
The drug consists of dried root of Eleusine corocana (L.) Gaertn. (Fam. Poaceae),  
an erect, stout, annual grass, cultivated throughout India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:R¡g¢, Madh£li, Marka¶ahastat¤¸a 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Marua 
English:Finger Millet, Ragi 
Gujrati  :Naagali-Baavato 
Hindi    :Manduaa, Makaraa, Raagi 
Kannada:Raagi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Muttari, Raagi 
Marathi:Naachnee 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Kodra, Madua, Koda 
Tamil   :Raagi, Kejhavaragu(siddha) 
Telugu  :Raagulu, Tagidelu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root fibrous, well branched, upto 25 cm long, 3.5 mm in thickness, gradually  
tapering, creamy white, rough and dirty; root hairs present, frac ture, brittle, fibrous,  
centre hollow; taste, earthen; no odour.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows epiblema consisting of two layers, the cells of the outer layer giving  
rise to root hairs; the inner layer called rhizodermis has slightly thicker walled hexagonal  
cells, followed by a cortex traversed by trabeculae, giving rise to large air  spaces; 
endodermis  characterized  by  the  presence  of  cas parian  strips  on  the  radial  walls,  
followed by a single layered pericycle of fibre and stone cells; stone cells circular, with  
radial canals, and a narrow or wide lumen; phloem and xylem patches present below this  
layer arranged radially;  pith cells somewhat circular and parenchymatous.
Powder - Shows under the microscope, tracheids measuring between 115 and 285 µ in 
length and between 13 and 40 µ in breadth, circular pits present on the surface; vessels  
117elongated, cross wall perforation plates simple; elongated pits present on the walls of  
vessel; thin walled parenchymatous cells and circular stone cells present. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.3  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of methanolic extract of the drug on precoated silica gel G plate, using  
methanol - chloroform (3 : 7) and on spraying with 10% sulphuric acid in ethyl alcohol  
followed by heating the plate for five minute at 110oC, three spots appeared at Rf.  0.82  
(Pink colour) comparable to the spot of sitosterol glucoside, 0.23 (Blackish grey), 0.15  
(Blackish grey).
 
 CONSTITUENTS   -  Flavonoids, orientin, isoorientin, vitexin, isovitexin, violanthin,  
lucenin-1, tricin, keto acids; polysaccharide and the free sugars,  
β-sitosterol glucoside.
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :Pittahara, V¤Àya, TridoÀa¿¡maka, RaktadoÀahara, Ras¡yana 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -   Amlapitt¡ntaka  Modaka,  Am¤ta  Guggulu,  
A¿vagandh¡di  Leha,  KuÀ¶h¡di  Kv¡tha,  
Ka¶utumby¡di Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  áv¡sa, K¡sa, T¤À¸¡, Karap¡da D¡ha, V¤kk¡¿mar¢, Jvaropdrava 
DOSE  -  5-10 g.   
   
  
11847. Mahameda (Rz & Rt.) 
MAHËMEDË (Rhizome and Root) 
Mah¡med¡ consists of dried rhizome and root of Polygonatum cirrhifolium Royle 
(Fam. Liliaceae), a herb found in the temperate Himalayas.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Mah¡meda, Vasucchidr¡, Tridanti, Devama¸¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:Mahameda 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Mahameda, Devarigaala 
Kannada:Mahamedha 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Mahameda 
Marathi:-- 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Mahameda 
Telugu  :Mahameda 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Rhizome dirty brown in colour, 2 to 8 cm long and about 2.5 to 3 cm broad,  
having longitudinal markings on the surface and rough with irregular wrinkles; fracture,  
short and smooth; odour, distinct; taste, sweet with a slight bitter after-taste.
b) Microscopic 
Rhizome :  T.S.  shows  a single  layered  cuticularized  epidermis  having  actinocytic  
stomata followed by ground parenchymatous cortex of polygonal to isodiametric cells in  
which vascular bundles are scattered; in cortical cells starch grains, numerous idioblasts  
with raphides, and druses of calcium oxalate present; numerous round cavities present in  
the cortical region; endodermis between cortex and inner core absent; vascular bundles  
unevenly scattered, amphivasal; xylem elements represented by tracheids and xylem  
parenchyma; phloem composed of sieve tubes, companion cells and phloem parenchyma.  
Root : T.S. shows a single layered epiblema, cells polygonal, bearing simple unicellular  
root hairs; a single layered hypodermis, cells larger, hexagonal, slightly thick walled; a  
119broad  cortex,  cells  thin  walled  and  of   varying  shapes  and  sizes  with  very  small  
intercellular spaces, and containing circular starch grains measuring between 10 to 40 µ 
in diameter; idioblasts with raphides  present; endodermis single layered, characterized  
by the presence of casparian strips on their radial walls; pericycle single layered; stele  
exarch, polyarch, xylem consist of tracheids, vessels with simple perforation plate and  
reticulate thickenings, and xylem parenchy ma; phloem consist of sieve tubes, companion  
cells and phloem parenchyma;  small pith  present in centre with parenchymatous cells.
Powder : Dark brown; under microscope shows epidermal cells with actinocytic stomata  
and cortical cells in surface view; starch grains ovoid with concentric striation, either  
singly or in groups; raphides and druses present; tracheids elongated with pointed ends,  
wall slightly wavy towards tips, thickenings reticulate; vessels with simple, cross wall  
perforation, thickenings reticulate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   3.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4.5  per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     70   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of methanolic extract of the roots/rhizome on a precoated silica gel G  
plate, using methanol : chloroform (3 : 7). On spraying with 10% sulphuric acid in ethyl  
alcohol and heating the plate for about 5 minute at 110oC, two spots appear at Rf. 0.42  
and 0.30 showing blackish grey fluorescent were found comparable to the spots of  
glucose and sucrose respectively.
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Glucose, Sucrose
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :áukravardhaka, B¤Æha¸a, J¢van¢ya, Pittahara, Stanyajanna, V¡tahara,  
V¤Àya, Kaphavardhaka, Rucya 
 
120IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  A¿oka Gh¤ta, áiv¡gutik¡, Am¤tapr¡¿a Gh¤ta, Da¿am
£l¡riÀ¶a,  Dh¡nvantara  Taila,  B¤hatm¡sa  Taila,  
Mah¡n¡r¡yana Taila, V¡s¡candan¡di Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  B¡laroga, D¡ha, Jvara, K¡mal¡, KÀaya, Raktapitta, Raktavik¡ra,  
KÀata kÀ¢¸a 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
12148. Madhusnuhi (Tub.Rt) 
MADHUSNUHÌ (Tuberous Root) 
Madhusnuh¢ consists of tuberous root of  Smilax china  Linn. (Fam. Liliaceae), a  
deciduous climber with sparsely prickled or unarmed stem. It is imported from China and  
Japan. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Dv¢p¡ntara Vac¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Chopcheenee, Kumarika, Shukchin 
English:China root 
Gujrati  :Chopcheenee 
Hindi    :Chopcheenee 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:China Pairu 
Marathi:Chopcheenee 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Parangichekkai 
Telugu  :Pirngichekka 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Tubers about 6 to 12 cm long, 2 to 4 cm wide, rough, irregular, cylindrical,  
curved, slightly tapering with brownish or blackish scars; externally brownish-yellow in  
colour, and internally brown in colour; fracture, hard; odour not characteristic; taste,  
slightly bitter. 
b) Microscopic 
Cortex shows several layers of thin-walled, polygonal, elongated mucilaginous  
parenchymatous cells, a few cells containing raphides of calcium oxalate; endodermis  
not distinguished; ground tissue having several vascular bundles consisting of usual  
elements;  fibres  long  and  aseptate;  numerous  simple  and  compound  starch  grains,  
measuring 16 to 38  µ in dia. with 2 to more than 9 components mostly spherical to  
ovoid, having hilum in centre. 
122Powder : Shows light brown, fragments of mucilaginous parenchymatous cells of cortex  
fibres and vessels with reticulate thickening; a few scattered needles of calcium oxalate  
from raphides; numerous simple and compound starch grains measuring 16 to 38 µ in 
dia. with 2 to more than 9 components, mostly spherical to ovoid having hilum in centre.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   0.6  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.006per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     0.8  per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated Silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using Toluene : Ethyl acetate : Methanol (10 : 10 : 4) as mobile phase and on spraying  
with Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105oC for ten minutes 
ten spots appear at Rf. 0.09 (dark green), 0.17 (violet), 0.21 (dirty yellow), 0.26 (grey),  
0.32 (yellow), 0.48, 0.55 and 0.58 (all violet), 0.73 (greenish blue) and 0.77 (violet).
 
 
CONSTITUENTS   -   Saponins,  sarsaponin  and  parallin,  which  yield  isomeric  
sapogenins,  sarsapogenin  and  smilogenin.  It  also  contains  
sitosterol and stigmasterol in the free form and as glucosides. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :áothahara, áukra¿odhaka, D¢pana, M£trala, Rakta¿odhaka, Ras¡yana,  
TridoÀahara,  V¤Àya,  Vedan¡sth¡pana,  Nad¢balya,  Anulomana,  
ávedajanana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Madhusnuh¢ Ras¡yana, Copaciny¡di C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   á£la,  Apasm¡ra,  Ëdhm¡na,  Ga¸·am¡l¡,  K¤mi,  KuÀ¶ha,  P
£yameha,  Sandhiv¡ta,  Unm¡da,  Vibandha,  áukravik¡ra,  
V¡tavy¡di, Phiranga, Kampav¡ta 
DOSE  -  3-6 g powder. 
12349. Medasaka(St.Bk.) 
MEDËSAKAH (Stem Bark) 
Med¡sakah   consists of stem bark of  Litsea chinensis La m. syn.  L. glutinosa 
(Lour.) C.B. Robins, L. sebifera Pers. (Fam. Lauraceae), an evergreen shrub or tree, upto  
25 m in height and about 1.5 m in girth with a clean bole, found throughout India,  
ascending upto an altitude of 1350 m in outer Himalayas.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Med¡sakah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Kukurchite 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Meda Lakdee 
Hindi    :Maida Lakdee 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Meda Lakdee 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Medasaka 
Tamil   :Medalakavi 
Telugu  :Meda 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Pieces of bark 1.5 to1.6 cm in length; 0.1 to 0.5 cm in width; external surface  
rough, corky, greenish - yellow to yellowish - brown; internal surface smooth, longitu-
dinally striated, dark brown to black; fracture, short and uneven. 
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows broad zone of cork, 5 to 8 layered; secondary cortex consisting of  
patches of sclereids, fibres, parenchyma, occasionally containing rhomboidal crystals of  
calcium oxalate, abundant starch grains, cells containing tannins and mucilage; starch  
grains spherical to oval, single or in groups, simple or compound, measuring from 1.5 to  
8 µ; fibres long, lignified with tapering ends, measuring from 370 to 630 µ in length and 
23 to 35 µ in width. 
Powder -  Light brown in colour, odour strong, bitter and mucilaginous showing cork  
tissue, starch grains, sclereids, fibres, cells containing tannins and mucilage; sclereids  
124round to oblong, laterally compressed, with narrow lumen, and showing radiating pit  
canals.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of  the  alcoholic  extract on  silica gel  'G'  plate  (0.2  mm  thick)  using  
chloroform: methanol: acetic acid  (80:20:2) shows Under UV (254 nm) three spots at  
Rf. 0.07 (brown), 0.15 and 0.23 (both violet). Under UV (366 nm) two fluorescent spots  
appear at Rf. 0.68 (pink) and 0.89 (blue). On exposure to iodine vapour five spots appear  
at Rf. 0.15, 0.20, 0.23, 0.30 and 0.82 (all yellowish brown). On spraying with 5% ferric  
chloride solution four spots appear at Rf. 0.07 (violet), 0.15 (blue), 0.23 and 0.30 (both  
faint green). 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Alkaloids (Laurotetaline, actinodaphine, boldine, norboldine,  
sebiferine and litseferine).
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pana, Kaphahara, Stambhana, V¡tahara, Bhagnapras¡dhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Asthisandh¡naka Lepa 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   á£la,  Agnim¡ndya,  áotha,  Atis¡ra,  V¡tavik¡ra,  Raktasr¡va,  
Asthibhanga 
DOSE  -  5-10 g powder. 
   
  
12550. Medasaka(Wd) 
MEDËSAKAH (Wood) 
Med¡sakah consists of wood of  Litsea chinensis Lam . syn.  L. glutinosa  (Lour.) 
C.B. Robins, L. sebifera Pers. (Fam. Lauraceae), an evergreen shrub or tree, upto 25 m in  
height and about 1.5 m in girth with a clean bole, found throughout India, ascending upto  
an altitude of 1350 m in outer Himalayas.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Med¡sakah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Kukurchite 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Meda Lakadee 
Hindi    :Meda Lakadee 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Meda Lakadee, -- 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Medalakavi 
Tamil   :Meda 
Telugu  :Jeevakamu 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Wood - Thick and thin pieces of wood, 14 to 21 cm in length and 0.5 to 2 cm in width;  
yellowish-white; surface rough with very fine longitudinal striations;  fracture, hard,  
fibrous. 
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows vessels, either single or in groups of 2 or 3; xylem fibres arranged in  
radial rows with thick walls; medullary rays prominent, uni to tetraseriate, radially  
elongated, upto 30 cells in height as seen in tangential section and containing abundant  
spherical to oval starch grains, single or in groups, simple or compound, measuring from  
3 to 9 µ; fibres long, linear, lignified with blunt ends, measuring in length from 530 to  
1060 µ and from 13 to 24 µ in width. 
126Powder -  Pale yellowish-brown, having characteristic odour, slightly  bitter in taste;  
shows fragments of lignified fibres, starch grains, bordered pitted vessels and some  
vessels showing scalariform thickenings on their secondary wall. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     1.5  per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of  the  alcoholic  extract on  silica gel  'G'  plate  (0.2  mm  thick)  using  
chloroform : methanol (80:20) shows under UV (254 nm) three spots at Rf. 0.10 (violet),  
0.29 (faint brown) and 0.52 (yellowish green). Under UV (366 nm) three fluorescent  
spots appear at Rf. 0.29 (brown), 0.52 (yellow) and 0.68 (blue). On exposure to iodine  
vapour eight spots appear at Rf. 0.10 (brown), 0.13, 0.16, 0.24, 0.29, 0.52, 0.68 and 0.74  
(all yellowish brown). On spraying with 10% methanolic-sulphuric acid and heating the  
plate at 110oC for ten minutes ten spots appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.16 (both brown), 0.26  
(grey), 0.31 (brown), 0.40 (purple), 0.44, 0.52, 0.57 (all brown), 0.68 (purple) and 0.77  
(brown). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Alkaloids (Laurotetanine, actinodaphine, boldine, norboldine).
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pana, Kaphahara, V¡tahara, Stambhana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   -  Aileyaka  T¡ila (Citrak¡di   Taila), V¡taghna  Lepa  
(Cint¡ma¸i  Rasa) 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  á£la, Agnim¡ndya, áotha, Atis¡ra, Raktasr¡va, V¡tavik¡ra 
DOSE  -  1 to 3 g powder. 
   
  
12751. Meshashringi (Lf) 
MEâAáÎNGÌ (Leaf) 
MeÀa¿¤ng¢  consists  of  dried  leaf  of  Gymnema  sylvestre  R.Br.  (Fam. 
Asclepiadaceae), a large woody, much branched, climber, with pubescent young parts,  
found throughout India in dry forests upto 600 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Madhun¡¿in¢, Aj¡¿¤ng¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Medhasingi 
English:Periploca of the wood 
Gujrati  :Kaavalee, Medhasinge 
Hindi    :Gudmaar, Medhaa Singee 
Kannada:Kadhasige 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Cakkarakkolli, Madhunaashini 
Marathi:Kaavalee, Medhaashingi 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Shirukurum Kaay, Shakkaraikkolli 
Telugu  :Podapatro 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaf simple, opposite, elliptical or ovate, petiolate, petiole 6 to 12 mm long and  
pubescent; lamina 3 to 6 cm long and 1 to 3 cm broad; acute or shortly acuminate; more  
or less pubescent on both sides, base rounded or cordate, venation reticulate; odour,  
unpleasant; taste, bitter and acrid. 
b) Microscopic 
Leaf -
 
Petiole - Nearly semi circular in outline having a deep furrow, shows a single layered  
epidermis covered with thick cuticle; multicellular uniseriate trichomes present; cortex  
composed  of  3  or  4  layers  of  collenchyma  and  3  or  4  layers  of  thin  walled  
parenchymatous cells with intercellular spaces; vascular bundle bicollateral, conjoint and  
3 in number, one central larger and crescent shaped and 2 lateral and smaller in size; a  
few rosette crystals of calcium oxalate present in cortical region.
128Midrib - Epidermis and trichome as in petiole; epidermis followed by 2 or 3 layers of  
collenchyma adjacent to the lower surface; vascular bundle crescent shaped, bicollateral,  
conjoint and situated in centre; rest of the tissue between collenchyma and vascular  
bundles  consisting  of  polygonal  thin-walled  parenchymatous  cells  with  intercellular  
spaces, a few having rosette crystals of calcium oxalate.
Lamina - Shows dorsiventral structure; epidermis and trichome as in petiole and midrib;  
trichome cylindrical, consists of 3 to 6 cells nearly similar in width and variable in  
length, terminal cells blunt, most of them curved inwards from the leaf surface; palisade  
1 or 2 layers; spongy parenchyma irregular, arranged with distinct intercellular spaces,  
rosette crystals of calcium oxalate present in this region; stomata paracytic, present only  
on lower surface; palisade ratio 7 or 8; stomatal index 20 to 25, vein islet number 7 to 10  
per sq. mm. 
Powder -  Light green; under microscope shows epidermal cells having nearly straight  
wall, and paracytic stomata in surface view; rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; broken  
pieces of trichomes and spiral vessels. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   12   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     28   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica Gel 'G' plate using n-Hexane : Toluene :  
Ethylacetate (5:10:2) as mobile phase shows four fluorescent zones under U.V. (366 nm)  
at Rf. 0.24, 0.37 (both Red), 0.50 (blue) and 0.60 (Red). On spraying with Anisaldehyde-
Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 110o for ten minutes seven spots appear at  
Rf. 0.29 (green), 0.37, 0.47 (both violet), 0.55 (pink), 0.60 (green), 0.66 (violet) and 0.93  
(pink).
CONSTITUENTS  -  Triterpenoid saponins of gymnemic acid A, B, C and D with sugar-
residues such as glucuronic acid, galacturonic acid, ferulic and angelic acids attached as  
carboxylic  acids.  Several  isopropylene  derivatives  of  gymnemagenin,  a  hexahy-
droterpene, gymnemagenin, gymnemic acid. The leaves also contain betaine, choline,  
gymnamine  alkaloids,  inositol,  d-quercitol.  Hydrocarbons  such  as  nonacosane,  
hentriacontane, tritriacontane, pentatriacontane, phytin, resin, tartaric acid, formic acid,  
butyric acid, amino acids such as leucine, isoleucine, valine, alanine, γ-butyric acid. 
129PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :CakÀuÀya, D¢pana, Kaphahara, V¡tahara, ViÀaghna, SraÆas¡na 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Mah¡viÀagarbha Taila, Ayaskrt¢, Nyagrodh¡di C£r¸a,  
M¤tasanji Van¢ Sur¡ 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   á£la,  áopha,  Ar¿a,  áv¡sa,  H¤droga,  K¡sa,  K¤mi,  KuÀ¶ha,  
Netraroga, Prameha, Vrana, Dantak¤mi 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
13052. Meshashringi (LRt) 
MEâAáÎNGÌ (Root) 
MeÀa¿¤ng¢ consists of root of Gymnema sylvestre R. Br. (Fam. Asclepiadaceae), a  
large woody, climber, much branched, with pubescent young parts, found throughout India  
in dry forests upto 600 m. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Madhun¡¿in¢, Aja¿¤ng¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Medhasingi 
English:Periploca of the woods 
Gujrati  :Kaavalee, Medhasinge 
Hindi    :Gudmaar, Medhaasingee 
Kannada:Kadhasige 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Cakkarakkolli, Madhunaashini 
Marathi:Kaavalee, Medhaashingi 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Shakkaraikkolli, Shirukurumkaay 
Telugu  :Podapatro 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Tap  root  branched,  rough,  longitudinally  fissured,  corky,  soft  and  nodulose  
pieces, 2 to 7 cm long and 0.2 to 1.0 cm in thickness; external surface dark brown and  
cut surface showing a core cream in colour; fracture, splintery; odour, unpleasant; taste,  
bitter and acrid. 
b) Microscopic 
Root -Shows 5 to 20 rows of tangentially elongated and radially arranged cork cells;  
secondary cortex a wide zone consisting of oval to polygonal cells somewhat irregular in  
shape and moderately thick walled, filled with rosette crystals of calcium oxalate and a  
few simple or compound starch grains; secondary phloem composed of sieve tubes,  
companion cells and phloem parenchyma, with mostly large and a few small rosette  
crystals and starch grains; medullary rays prominent, uni or multi seriate, generally tetra  
seriate, extending from primary xylem to secondary phloem; groups of oval to elongated,  
thick walled, lignified sclereids with clear striations and narrow lumen present in cortex  
131and phloem region; secondary xylem consists of usual lignified elements; vessels simple  
pitted, single or 2 to 7 in radial groups and dispersed throughout the xylem region; fibres  
long with tapering ends and wide lumen; primary xylem present diarch.
Powder  -  Light  yellow;  shows  thick  walled  cork  cells;  polygonal,  thin  walled  
parenchymatous cells, simple pitted fibres and vessels; groups of sclereids, large and a  
few  small  rosette  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate,  simple  and  compound  starch  grains,  
measuring 5 to 11 µ in dia. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica Gel 'G' plate using Toluene : Ethylacetate  
: Methanol (10:10:4) as mobile phase shows on spraying with Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric  
acid reagent and heating the plate at 110oC for ten minutes eight spots at Rf. 0.17  
(brown), 0.25 (violet), 0.48 (grey), 0.57 (pink), 0.68, 0.80, 0.87 (violet) and 0.95 (pink).
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pana, Kaphahara, M£trala, V¡tahara, áirovirecaka, SraÆ¿ana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Nyagrodh¡di C£r¸a, Mah¡ ViÀagarbha Taila, M¤tasanj
¢van¢sur¡ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  áv¡sa, D¡ha, H¤droga, K¡sa, K¤miroga, KuÀ¶ha, M£trak¤cchra,  
Prameha,  Raktavik¡ra,  Vra¸a,  ViÀavik¡ra,  AkÀi¿£la,  Vidrdhi,  
V¡tahara. 
DOSE  -  50 - 100 ml decoction. 
       1 - 2 g powder. 
   
  
13253. Nandi (Rt) 
NANDÌ (Root) 
Nand¢ consists of dried root of  Ficus arnottiana Miq. (Fam. Moraceae), a glabrous  
tree or shrub without aerial roots, found throughout India in rocky hills up to 1350 m  
altitude. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:P¡r¿vapippala,  Praroh¢,  Gardhabh¡¸·a,  Gajap¡dapa,  Sth¡l¢druma,  
Nand¢v¤kÀa 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Kamru 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Naandrukheevad 
Hindi    :Beliya Peepal 
Kannada:Kadarasu, Kallarase 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kallarayal 
Marathi:Nandee vruksh, Naandruk 
Oriya   :Plokhyo 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Kagoli, Kodiarasu, Kallarasu 
Telugu  :Kallaravi, Kondaravi 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug available in cut pieces with or without bark of varying size, 0.5 to 2.0 cm in  
thickness; external surface brownish in colour and slightly rough due to exfoliation of  
cork, cut surface, yellowish-brown in colour; fracture, fibrous; odour  and taste not  
characteristic. 
b) Microscopic 
Transverse section of root shows thick cuticle, single layered epidermis, cells  
rectangular followed by 3 or 4 layers of cork cells; cork cambium 2 to 4 layered;  
secondary cortex wide consisting of rectangular to polygonal thin walled pitted cells,  
some filled with reddish-brown  substance;  circular  to elongated,  lignified,  elliptical  
stone cells, a few showing concentric striations present in this region; a few prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate and abundant round to oval starch grains upto about 12 µ in 
dia. present in cortical cells; endodermis and pericycle not distinct; secondary phloem  
shows a wide zone consisting of sieve tubes, companion cells, fibres and ray cells;  
133phloem parenchyma contains prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and round to oval  
starch grains, laticiferous cells also present in this region; fibres non-lignified, thick  
walled with narrow lumen; secondary xylem elements thick walled and lignified; vessels  
and tracheids show bordered pits; medullary rays uni to multiseriate, wide towards  
peripheral region. 
Powder : Light brown; under microscope shows groups of parenchyma; simple, round to  
oval starch grains, measuring upto 12 µ in dia. and crystals, fragments of fibres, circular  
to elongated, elliptical stone cells, a few laticiferous cells and border pitted vessels and  
tracheids. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on Silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene :  
Chloroform (8:12 v/v) as mobile phase shows on exposure to Iodine vapour four spots at  
Rf. 0.25, 0.37, 0.75 and 0.89 (all yellow). On spraying with Anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid  
reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 105o C. The same four spots appear  
violet at Rf. 0.25, 0.37, 0.75 and 0.89.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Gr¡h¢, Kaphahara, Medohara, Pittahara, Bhagnasandh¡na 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Nyagrodh¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Bhagna, D¡ha, Kaphavik¡ra, Raktapitta, Raktavik¡ra, ViÀavik¡ra,  
Vra¸a, YonidoÀa 
DOSE  -  10 - 20 g powder. 
        30 - 50 g decoction. 
   
13454. Nilajhinti (Rt) 
NÌLAJHINÙÌ (Root) 
N¢lajhin¶¢ consists of root of  Barleria strigosa  Willd. (Fam. Acanthaceae), a tall  
herb which is distributed throughout the upper gangentic plain and southern parts of India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:D¡s¢, B¡¸a, K¤À¸a, Saireyakah, N¢lasaireyakah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Jhaati, Kaaraajaati 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Kaataseriyo 
Hindi    :Nili, Katsaraiya 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Nilakurnni 
Marathi:Koraanti, Wahiti 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Shemmuli 
Telugu  :Mullugorant, Nilambaramu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Branched tap root, 2 to 10 mm in thickness; knotty and thicker at the transition  
zone with stem; dark brown; cut pieces of about 20 cm in length; cut or broken surface  
straw coloured and split; surface of fractured part smooth; bark sloughing off from  
broken areas; unpleasant odour; tasteless, texture rough. 
b) Microscopic 
T.S. of root reveals a circular outline; outer layers generally sloughed off; but  
strips of cork, cork cambium and cortex with occasional stone cells may be present;  
phloem composed mostly of parenchyma and fibres and separated from xylem by a  
flattened layer of cambium; xylem composed of thick walled cells and vessel elements  
and interrupted by 1 to 3 seriate rays made of squarish or rectangular cells radiating from  
8 to 12 points of primary xylem elements present at the periphery of the pith; 1 or 2  
growth  rings  visible  in  the  wood  region;  pith  made  of  large,  angular,  compactly  
arranged, thin walled cells. In dried market samples the pith region usually shows radial  
fractures; some cells of the pith show dark contents.
135Powder - Powder shows vascular elements with simple pitted thickenings, and tracheidal  
cells having pointed end walls. Stone cells, 60 to 120 µ present.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     1    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of  the alcoholic  extract on  slica gel 'G'  plate (0.2  mm  thick)  using  
ethylacetate : methanol  : water (9:0.5:0.5)  as the mobile phase  shows  under U.V.  
(366nm) spots at Rf 0.13 (Blue); 0.20 (Bluish green); 0.35 (Fluorescent blue); 0.44  
(Blue); 0.62 (Purplish blue); 0.82 (Blue); 0.91 (Orange).
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Ke¿ya,  M£trala,  V¡takaphahara,  ViÀaghna,  Ke¿araµjana,  Garbhav
¤ddhi Kara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  M¡¸ikya Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   áotha,  K¡sa,  Ka¸·u,  KuÀ¶ha,  M£sik¡viÀa,  M£trak¤cchra,  
Raktavik¡ra,  V¡tarakta,  V¡tajanyakÀaya,  áir¡granth¢,  
Dantaroga 
DOSE  -  10 - 20 ml swarasa. 
               50 - 100 ml kv¡tha.  
   
  
13655. Nimba (Rt.Bk) 
NIMBA (Root Bark) 
Nimba  consists  of  dried  root  bark  of  Azadirachta  indica  A .  Juss.  syn.  Melia 
azadirachta Linn. (Fam. Meliaceae), a medium to large evergreen tree attaining a height of  
15 to 20 m or more under favourable conditions and found throughout the plains of India  
upto an altitude of 900 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Picumaradah, AriÀ¶ah, Picumandah, Prabhadrah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Nim, Nimgaachh 
English:Margosa Tree, Neem Tree, Indian Lilac 
Gujrati  :Leemado 
Hindi    :Neem 
Kannada:Turakbevu, Huchchabevu, Chikkabevu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Veppu, Aryaveppu, Aaruveppu 
Marathi:Kadunimba, Nimb 
Oriya   :Neemo, Nimba 
Punjabi:Nimb, Nim 
Tamil   :Vempu, Veppu 
Telugu  :Vemu, Vepa 
Urdu    :Neem 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root bark available in quilled or curved pieces of varying sizes with a thickness  
of 0.25 to 0.50 cm; outer surface irregular, rough, scaly, fissured, reddish-brown or  
greyish-  brown;  inner  surface,  yellowish-brown  with  parallel  striations;  fracture,  
splintery and fibrous; odour like that of saw dust; taste, bitter.
b) Microscopic 
Root  bark  shows  cork,  cortex  and  phloem;  cork  generally  6  or  7  layers  of  
polygonal and thin walled cells with reddish-brown contents; outer cortex of tangentially  
elongated  large  rectangular  cells  with  tangentially  elongated  sclereids,  singly  or  in  
groups in isolated patches; sclereids vary in size and wall thickness, distinctly striated,  
pitted  and  often associated  with  cells  containing  crystal;  inner  cortex of  polygonal  
parenchymatous  cells  with  bundles  of  sclerenchymatous  fibres,  thick  walled  with  
irregular lumen; secondary phloem composed of alternating tangential bands of bast  
137fibres and parenchymatous tissues intercepted by uni to biseriate phloem rays; abundant  
starch grains present in parenchymatous cells of cortex and phloem; starch grains simple,  
or more usually, compound with 2 or 3 components, hilum cleft or  radiate, individual  
grain 5 to 20 µ; abundant prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate in cortex, of 10 to 15 µ, 
also  associated  with  phloem  fibres;  idioblasts  with  reddish-brown  contents  seen  in  
cortex; cells with fat droplets seen in inner cortex and phloem.
Powder - Reddish-brown; shows cork cells; numerous prismatic crystals of calcium  
oxalate both isolated, and in association  with phloem  fibres; individual  fibres with  
narrow lumen and elongated tapering ends; pitted macrosclereids with wide lumen and  
distinct striations; simple, and compound starch grains with 2 or 3 components, of 5 to  
20 µ in size; parenchymatous cells large and occasionally filled with brown contents.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   15   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using hexane : ethyl acetate (1:1) shows spots at Rf 0.08, 0.12, 0.19 (all violet), 0.25  
(mustard yellow), 0.33, 0.39, 0.46 (all light violet) and 0.82 (purple) on  spraying with  
1% Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent followed by heating the plate at 105oC for about ten 
minutes. 
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Tetranortriterpenoids, margocin, nimbidiol, nimbolicin,  azadirinin.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Ka¸·£ghna, á¢tagr¡h¢, Ah¤dya, Kaphahara, Pittahara, Rucya D¢pana,  
ViÀaghna, Vra¸¿odhana 
 
138IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Am¤taÀ¶aka, AÀ¶¡ngadas¡nga Lanha 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  áotha, Aruci, áv¡sa, Chardi, D¡ha, DuÀ¶a Vra¸a, Graha¸¢, Jvara,  
K¡sa, K¤miroga, Kaphavik¡ra, KuÀ¶ha, Prameha, Raktapitta, T
¤À¡, H¤ll¡sa, Yak¤tvik¡ra, Hr·ayavid¡ha, V¡mana 
DOSE  -   3 - 6 g.  
   
  
13956. Nimba (Fl) 
NIMBA (Flower) 
Nimba consists of dried flower and flower bud of Azadirachta indica A . Juss. syn. 
Melia azadirachta Linn. (Fam. Meliaceae), a medium to large size evergreen tree attaining  
a height of 15 to 20 m or more under favourable conditions and found through-hout the  
plains of India upto an altitude of 900 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:AriÀ¶ah, Picumandah, Picumaradah, Prabhadrah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Nim, Nimgaachh 
English:Indian Lilac, Margosa Tree, Neem tree 
Gujrati  :Leemado 
Hindi    :Neem 
Kannada:Chikkabevu, Huchchabevu, Turakbevu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Aaruveppu, Aryaveppu, Veppu 
Marathi:Nimb, Kadunimb 
Oriya   :Neemo, Nimba 
Punjabi:Nim, Nimba 
Tamil   :Vempu, Veppu 
Telugu  :Vemu, Vepa 
Urdu    :Neem 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Dried flowers are brown to deep brown; individual flower 5 to 6 mm long and 6  
to 11 mm wide, pentamerous, bisexual, regular and hypogynous; calyx 5, short, united at  
base; corolla 5, free, spathulate, spreading, 4.5 to 5.5 mm long 2 mm wide; stamens 10,  
monoadelphous,  staminal  tube  inserted  at  base  of  corolla;  gynoecium  tricarpellary,  
syncarpous, superior, trilocular, two ovules in each locule, style 1, stigma 3-lobed; taste,  
mildly bitter: odour, indistinct.
b) Microscopic 
Calyx - Sepal shows thin walled polygonal papillose epidermis; elongated thin  
walled  unicellular  conical  trichomes  of  varying  lengths;  rosette crystals  in  cells  of  
epidermis.
140Petals - Petal shows epidermis of rectangular cells papillose at margins, non-glandular  
unicellular trichomes, over 150 µ long, tubular and hyaline; glandular trichomes of about  
20 µ, numerous rosette crystals in epidermal cells.
Androecium  - Epidermis  of  staminal  tube  composed  of  thick  walled  rectangular  
parenchymatous cells and the endothecium of the anther walls.
Gynoecium - Stigma sticky, parenchymatous epidermal cells, elongated into extensive  
papillae, style thin walled, rectangular, ovary superior, trilocular.
Pollen Grain - Porous, 4-colporate, spherical 105 to161 µ in dia., with a smooth exine.
Powder - Yellowish-brown, fragments  of  parenchymatous  papillose  epidermal cells,  
trichomes,  numerous  vessels,  rosette  calcium  oxalate  crystals,  and  yellowish-brown  
pollen grains.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   14   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using chloroform : acetone (20:1) shows spots at Rf 0.12 (violet), 0.17 (light pink), 0.33  
(violet), 0.51 (purple), 0.64 (dark purple), 0.80 (light purple), 0.85 (light purple), 0.92  
(purple) on spraying with 1% Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent followed by heating the  
plate at 105oC for about ten minutes.
CONSTITUENTS  -  15-Acetoxy-7-deacetoxydihydroazadirone (neeflone),nonacosane  
(saturated hydrocarbon)
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :CakÀuÀya,  K¤mighna,  Kaphahara,  Pittahara,  V¡takara,  ViÀaghna,  
KuÀ¶haghna, Gr¡h¢. 
141 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   -  KuÀ¶hak¡l¡mla Rasa, KuÀ¶ha áailendra Rasa, K¤m
¢vin¡¿ana Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  áotha, Aruci, Chardi, D¡ha, H¤ll¡sa, Jvara, K¡sa, K¤mi, Ka¸·u,  
KuÀ¶ha,  Netraroga,  Phiranga,  Prameha,  Raktavik¡ra,  T¤À¸¡,  
ViÀamajvara, Vra¸a, Kaphapittaja Vik¡ra, árama, H¤dayavid¡ha 
DOSE  -  2 - 4 g  pu¿pa c£r¸a. 
          10 - 20 ml pu¿pa svarasa. 
   
  
14257. Nimba (Fr) 
NIMBA (Fruit) 
Nimba consists of whole dried fruit including seeds of Azadirachta indica A . Juss. 
syn.  Melia azadirachta  Linn. (Fam. Meliaceae), a medium to large size evergreen tree  
attaining a height of 15 to 20 m or more under favourable conditions and found through-
hout the plains of India upto an altitude of 900 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:AriÀ¶ah, Picumandah, Picumaradah, Prabhadrah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Nim, Nimgaachh 
English:Indian Lilac, Neem tree, Margosa tree 
Gujrati  :Leemado 
Hindi    :Neem 
Kannada:Chikkabevu, Huchchabevu, Turakbevu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Aaruveppu, Aryaveppu, Veppu 
Marathi:Kadunimb, Nimb 
Oriya   :Neemo 
Punjabi:Nim, Nimb 
Tamil   :Vempu, Vembu 
Telugu  :Vemu, Vepa 
Urdu    :Neem 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruit - Glabrous, dark reddish-brown, ovoid to ellipsoid drupes. 0.5 to 2 cm long, over  
one  cm  wide;  indehiscent,  deeply  wrinkled,  enclosing  a single  seed  in a brownish  
leathery pulp; odour strong; taste, bitter.
Seed- Brownish, dorsally convex; upto 1.5 cm long and 0.6 cm wide; seed coat thin,  
brownish,  shell-like, cracks to touch,  inside  of  cracked  pieces golden  yellow; seed  
kernel, light brown, oily; odour, strong; taste, bitter.
b) Microscopic 
Fruit  -  Pericarp  well  differentiated  into  epicarp,  mesocarp  and  endocarp;  
epidermis more than one layered; squarish to rectangular cells containing yellowish-
brown contents and oil droplets; mesocarp, many layered of loosely packed cells with  
143large elongated sclereids scattered in outer layers; endocarp of two distinct layers, outer  
of closely packed lignified stone cells, inner fibrous, loosely packed, lignified.
Seed - Seed kernel shows a thin brown testa, of isodiametric stone cells overlying  
integument of loosely packed parenchymatous cells; cotyledon consisting of parenchy-
matous cells containing abundant oil droplets.
Powder - Dark brown; shows abundant brachysclereids, columnar sclereids and pitted  
stone cells with wide lumen and distinct wall striations; groups of lignified fibres, thin-
walled,  arranged  in  network  of  loose  strands;  parenchymatous  cells  of  cotyledon  
containing  aleurone  grains  and  oil  globules;  fragments  of  testa  showing  distinctly  
striated isodiametric stone cells; a few scattered rosette crystals of calcium oxalate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     16   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     19   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using chloroform : acetone (18.5:1.5) shows spots at Rf 0.11 (greyish violet), 0.16  
(yellow), 0.19 (green), 0.24 (violet), 0.29 (grey), 0.33 (mustard yellow), 0.42 (pink),  
0.49 (greyish black), 0.57 (violet) and 0.76 (light purple) on spraying with 1% Vanillin-
Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105oC for about ten minutes. 
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   Fixed  oil  containing  diterpenoids  and  triterpenoids  
(limonoids);nimbin,  gedunin,  azadirachtin,  nimbidinin,  
salanin.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara,  Ras¡yana,  V¡tahara,  ViÀaghna,  Bhedan¢ya,  H
¤dayad¡hahara, P¡cana 
 
144IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Ar¿oghniva¶¢(Seed), Pal¡¿ab¢j¡di C£r¸a (Seed) 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  áiroroga, áotha, Ar¿a, Aruci, Chardi, D¡ha, Gulma, H¤ll¡sa,  
Jvara,  K¤mi,  KuÀ¶ha,  Prameha,  Raktapitta,  ViÀavik¡ra,  
Vibandha, Vra¸a, P¡litya, Netraruj¡, KÀata  KÀaya, Kh¡litya,  
Ga¸dam¡la 
DOSE  -  1 - 2 g c£r¸a. 
             5 - 10 drops of oil.   
   
  
14558. Palasha (Sd) 
PALËáAH (Seed) 
Pal¡¿ah consists of seed of  Butea monosperma  (Lam.) Kuntze, syn.  B. frondosa 
Roxb. (Fam. Fabaceae), a moderate sized deciduous tree, commonly called ''Flame of the  
Forest'', found throughout India upto a height of 1250 m, except in the arid zones. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Pal¡¿ah, KiÆ¿ukah, RaktapuÀpakah, V¡tapotha 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Palaash 
English:Butea seed, Flame of the Forest, Bastard teak 
Gujrati  :Khakharo 
Hindi    :Dhak, Palash, Tesoo 
Kannada:Muttagamara, Muttug 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Plashu 
Marathi:Palas, Palash paapada 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Purasu 
Telugu  :Moduga 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds reddish-brown, thin, flat, reniform, longer axis from 3 to 4 cm and shorter  
from 2 to 2.5 cm, raphe equal to antiraphe, micropyle inconspicuous; seed coat reddish  
brown, waxy; faint odour; taste, slightly acrid bitter; weight of 100 seeds 80 to115 g. 
b) Microscopic 
Single  layered  epidermis  of  testa  interrupted  by  balloon  shaped  cells;  
malphighian  cells  palisade  like,  thick-walled,  red,  unlignified,  lumen  large  but  not  
uniform; discontinuous transparent Linea lucida in upper half of Malphighian layer;  
osteosclereids irregular, nonlignified, highly thick walled, columnar, compressed and  
superposed; mesophyll occupies major portion of testa, upper and lower mesophyll cells  
small,  isodiametric  to  elliptic,  middle  layers  large,  angular,  condensed  with  small  
intercellular spaces; inner epidermis  reddish brown, distinct with small thick walled  
elongated cells externally covered by  thin  culticle.       
146The transection of cotyledon shows single layered, thick-walled epidermis having  
angular cells, followed by beaded parenchymatous cells containing starch and protein in  
form of spiral, as revealed by freshly prepared Millons Reagent; starch grains, rod  
shaped or ovoid, simple, 20 to 40  µm, hilum indistinct, lamellae distinct. Embryo is  
straight having a radicle with well-marked hypocotyl, epicotyl with a plumule and a pair  
of thick cotyledons.
Powder - Powder yellowish-brown; acrid and bitter with oily flavour and pleasant smell;  
small fragments of testa, broken and intact malphighian cells, osteosclereids, mesophyll  
cells isolated or in groups, cotyledonary parenchyma containing a few starch grains,  
abundant  spiral  protein  bodies,  mucilage  and  oil  globules;  when  treated  with  50%  
H2SO4, emits yellow fluorescence under UV-254 nm.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     25   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Protein                                    Not less than     18   per cent, Appendix    2.2.17 
Fatty oil                                  Not less than     6    per cent, Appendix    2.2.15 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using toluene : ethylacetate : methanol (85 : 15 : 0.5) as solvent system shows after  
spraying  with  anisaldehyde-sulphuric  acid  and  heating  the  plate  for  ten  minutes  at  
120oC, at Rf. 0.26 (magenta), 0.38 (greying green) and 0.56 (greyish green).
 
 CONSTITUENTS  -  Fatty oil; amino acids.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Sara, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pana,  Ras¡yana,  TridoÀahara,  V¤Àya,  Bhedana,  
Bhagnasandh¡nakara, Garbhanirodhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Ayask¤ti, K¤mimudgara Rasa 
 
147THERAPEUTIC USES  -  A¿mar¢, á£la, Ar¿a, Atis¡ra, D¡ha, Dadru, Gulma, K¡sa, K¤mi,  
Ka¸·u,  KuÀ¶ha,  M£trak¤cchra,  Medoroga,  P¡m¡,  Prameha,  
Raktavik¡ra, Tvakroga, Udararoga, V¡tarakta, Vra¸a, YonidoÀa,  
Gudajaroga,  SukradoÀa,  Pl¢haroga,  Netra¿ukra,  Pa¸·u,  V
¤ÀcikaviÀa 
DOSE  -  0.5 to 1 g. 
   
  
14859. Palasha (Fl) 
PALËáAH (Dried Flower) 
Pal¡¿ah consists of dried flower of  Butea monosperma  (Lam.) Kuntze syn.  B. 
frondosa Roxb. (Fam. Fabaceae), a moderate sized deciduous tree, commonly called Flame  
of the Forest'', flowering in March - May found throughout India upto a height of 1250 m,  
except in the arid zones. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:KiÆ¿uka, RaktapuÀpaka, KÀ¡r¿reÀ¶ha 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Palash 
English:Bastard teak, Flame of the Forest, Butea Seed 
Gujrati  :Khaakharo 
Hindi    :Dhaak, Tesu, Palaash 
Kannada:Muttug, Muttulu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Plashu 
Marathi:Palas, Palash paapda 
Oriya   :Porasu, Kijuko 
Punjabi:Tesh 
Tamil   :Purasu 
Telugu  :Moduga 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Inflorescence raceme; flowers large, 4 to 6 cm long, alternate, with pubescent  
long, velvety, olive green peduncle; bright yellowish-red to orange red pedicels, 1.5 cm  
long,  twisted,  bracteate,  bracts  and  bracteoles  small,  linear,  velvety,  orange  green,  
deciduous; calyx campanulate, 5-partite, oblique, about 1 cm long, dark olive green,  
densely velvety outside, clothed with silky hairs within, two upper teeth connate, large,  
three lower ones unequal, the lowest being much shorter than the lateral ones; corolla 4  
to 6 cm. long, orange red, covered outside with silky white hairs, papilionaceous; stamen  
diadelphous; anthers linear, yellow; ovary stipitate, silky, pubescent, style incurved,  
longer than the stamens.
 
149b) Microscopic 
Pedicel:  T.S. of pedicel circular in outline, bearing numerous 2 to 4 celled uniseriate  
hairs; cortex collenchymatous, differentiated in two zones- outer formed of smaller cells  
with  some  contents  and  inner  zone  of  larger  cells;  cortex  and  stele  separated  by  
endodermis  of  barrel  shaped  cells  containing  starch  grains;  phloem  parenchyma  
containing tannin; pith parenchymatous; vascular bundles separated by broad medullary  
rays and arranged in a ring; rhomboidal crystals of calcium oxalate present in cortex.
Sepals: Sepals on upper surface have one type of trichome 3 to 5 celled, with prominent  
basal cell; on lower surface two types of trichomes, (i) multicellular, uniseriate, long,  
thick walled with circular basal cell; (ii) a few multicellular, club-shaped, trichomes  
glandular in nature; stomata anomocytic type.
Petals: Upper surface of wing petal with profuse 2 to 6 celled hairs on its basal part and  
multicellular trichomes at the tip; lower surface of wing petal covered with multicellular  
uniseriate trichomes; papillate epidermal cells in the middle region of wing petal, in  
surface view shows striations radiating from the base of papilla; cells in apical region of  
wing petal without papillate, but narrow with random striation; upper surface of standard  
petal glabrous but margins hairy; multicellular, club shaped appendages and uniseriate 2  
to 5 celled trichomes present at the apex. In the middle portion cells longer than broad,  
drawn out into papillae with striations radiating out from this; upper surface of keel petal  
cells polygonal, with irregular striations, trichomes profuse except at apical region.
Stamens diadelphous; pollen grain 3 pored, oblate, spheroidal; about 28 µ long and 30 µ 
m broad, pore circular to elongate, 8 to 12.5 µ m, exine wall surface foveolate. 
Ovary with two types of trichomes, (i) thin walled having dense contents (ii) 2 to 3  
celled trichome, placentation marginal; epidermal cells of style long, narrow in surface  
view, trichomes uniseriate multicellular and thick walled in stylar region.
Powder - Brownish-yellow, slightly bitter in taste, no characteristic odour; shows pieces  
of  various  types  of  trichomes,  vascular  tissue,  epidermal  cells  with  characteristic  
papillae, polygonal cells with linear striations, pollen grains, and styloid crystals of  
calcium oxalate; powder treated with 1N HCl followed by one drop of nitrocellulose in  
amylacetate becomes orange yellow under UV 365 nm and with 1N NaOH in methanol  
becomes, yellowish-black under UV 254 nm.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     15   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     32   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
150 T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using  ethyl  acetate  :  methanol  :  water  (100  :  15  :  5)  shows  under  UV  (366  nm)  
fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.17 (yellow), 0.26 (yellow), 0.53 (light brown), 0.58 (greenish  
yellow) and 0.63 (greenish yellow). On spraying with 5% KOH reagent spots at Rf. 0.17  
(yellow), 0.26 (yellow), 0.58 (green) and 0.63 (green).
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   Coumarins  and  glycosides,  cumaranone  glycosides,  butrin,  
isobutrin,  monospermoside,  isomonospermoside,  
carbomethoxy-3,  6-dioxo-5-hydro-1,  2,  4-triazine,  coreopsin,  
isocoreopsin. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, Sara 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :D¢pana,  Kaphahara,  KuÀ¶haghna,  M£trala,  Pittahara,  Rakta  
Stambhana, Sandh¡n¢ya, Trsn¡¿¡maka, D¡hapra¿amana, Gr¡h¢ 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Kunkum¡di Taila, Va´a Bhasma (J¡ra¸a (b)) 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  Ar¿a, D¡ha, Graha¸¢, Gulma, Ka¸·u, KuÀ¶ha, M£trakrcchra,  
Netra¿ukra,  Pl¢h¡roga,  Raktapitta,  Raktavik¡ra,  V¡tarakta,  
TrÀ¸¡, Krmi, Pitt¡bhiÀyanda 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
15160. Parasika yavani (Sd) 
PËRASÌKAYAVËNÌ (Seed) 
P¡ras¢kayav¡n¢  consists  of  the  seed  of  Hyoscyamus  niger  Linn.  (Fam. 
Solanaceae), an annual or biennial herb, native to the Mediterranean region and temperate  
Asia, occurring in Western Himalayas from Kashmir to Kumaon at an altitude of 1600 to  
4000 m, imported into India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Khur¡s¡n¢ Yav¡n¢, Yavan¢, TuruÀak¡, Madak¡ri¸¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Khorasani ajwan 
English:Henbane 
Gujrati  :Khurasanee ajma, Khurasanee ajmo 
Hindi    :Khurasanee ajvayan,  
Kannada:Khurasanee, Ajawaana 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Khurasaanee, Paarasika, Yavaani 
Marathi:Khurasanee ova 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Khurasanee ajvain, Bangidewana 
Tamil   :Kuraasanee Yomam 
Telugu  :Kurasanee vamu, Khurasanee omam 
Urdu    :Ajvayanee Khursanee 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds irregularly reniform or sub-quadrate, slightly over a mm in size, dark grey,  
surface concave, odour  pleasantly  aromatic, taste  bitter, mucilaginous  and  pungent,  
aromatic.
b) Microscopic 
Transverse section of seed shows the presence of thick cuticle, testa with two  
layers, outer one with a row of osteosclereids size ranging from 50 to 80 µ, inner one 
with crushed parenchyma, endosperm cells thin walled, containing oil globules, embryo  
coiled; starch absent.
Powder -  Dark brown aromatic smell, bitter mucilagenous taste and an oily texture; a  
number of flask-shaped or dumb-bell shaped osteosclereids seen; fragments of testa in  
surface view, showing cells with sinuous walls; powder when treated with Sudan IV and  
152mounted in glycerine shows the presence of oil globules which turn orange red; powder  
cleared with dilute nitric acid shows surface view of sculpturing on testa.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     16   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick) using  
toluene  :  ethyl  acetate  :  diethyl  amine  (70:20:10)  shows  under  UV  (366  nm)  one  
fluorescent spot at Rf. 0.49 (blue). After spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid  
reagent and heating the plate at 105oC for ten minutes spots appear at Rf. 0.09 (Brown),  
0.49 (brown), 0.69 (greenish brown). After spraying with modified Dragendorff's reagent  
spots appear at Rf. 0.90, 0.77, 0.61, 0.23 and 0.10.
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Tropane alkaloids hyoscyamine, (its racemic mixture and atropine)  
and hyoscine.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Pittakara,  D¢pana,  Gr¡h¢,  Kaphahara,  V¡tahara,  Vedan¡sth¡pana,  
M¡daka, P¡caka, Nidr¡kara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Sarpagandh¡ghna Va¶¢ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  Ën¡ha, A¿mar¢, á£la, áv¡sa, Gulma, K¡sa, K¤mi, Unm¡da,  
Rajahk¤cchra, á¢ghrap¡tana, SvpanadoÀa, Udara¿£la, Anidr¡,  
Sandhi¿£la 
DOSE  -  125 - 500 mg. 
   
  
15361. Pattura(Wh.Pl) 
PAÙÙÍRA (Whole Plant) 
Pa¶¶£ra  consists  of  whole  plant  of  Aerva  lanata  (Linn.)  Juss.  (Fam.  
Amaranthaceae),  an  erect  or  prostrate  branched  herb,  30  to  60  cm  in  height,  found  
throughout India in waste lands.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:GorakÀagaµja, Bhadr¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Chaya 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Gorakhganjo 
Hindi    :Gorakhaganja 
Kannada:Bilihindisoppu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Cherula 
Marathi:Kapurphutee, Kumrapindee 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Bhuikallan 
Tamil   :Cherupoolai 
Telugu  :Pindichettu, Kanda pindi 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Tap-root, laterally branched, cylindrical, up to 0.8 cm in thickness and about 25  
cm long pieces, externally light brown and rough but cut surface white and smooth;  
fracture, fibrous and hard. 
Stem - Nearly cylindrical, branching alternate, external surface shows slight ridges and  
furrows, hairy and light brown in colour; cut surface white; fracture, granular. 
Leaf - Simple, opposite, alternate, shortly petiolate, lamina 2.0 to 2.5 cm long and 1.0 to  
1.6 cm broad, elliptic-orbicular or ovate, acute, reticulate veined, margin entire, densely  
pubescent on both surfaces. 
Flower  -  Minute  cluster  as  axillary  spike;  greenish-white;  perianth  5,  bracteolate;  
actinomorphic, bisexual; stamen 5, opposite to perianth, anthers 2 lobed; stigma bifid,  
superior ovary, unilocular with campylotropous ovule. 
154Fruit - A greenish, roundish, compressed membranous, utricle or circumscissile capsule  
with a coriaceous upper part or lid and containg a single seed. 
Seed - Seed minute, 0.5 to 0.7 cm in dia., black, polished and kindney shaped; taste,  
pungent. 
b) Microscopic 
Root - Shows 5 to 7 layers of cork cells, upper 2 or 3 layers filled with brownish content;  
secondary cortex a wide zone consisting of circular to oval, elongated, thin walled  
parenchymatous cells, most of the cells containing rosette crystals of calcium oxalate;  
endodermis not distinct; pericycle present in the form of interrupted ring of pericyclic  
fibres; anamolous secondary growth present; secondary xylem and phloem tissues in  
form of 3 or 4 alternating rings; medullary bundles present; phloem consisting of sieve  
tubes, companion cells and phloem parenchyma; xylem consists of vessels, tracheids,  
fibres and xylem parenchyma; vessels circular to oval having simple pits; pith cells  
circular in shape containing rosette crystals of calcium oxalate.
Stem  - Shows slightly wavy outline, corresponding to ridges and furrows; epidermis  
single layered covered with thick cuticle; trichomes multicellular, end cells pointed or  
vesicular, warty and thick walled; cortex 6 or 7 layers with 3 or 4 layers below ridges  
being collenchymatous and 3 or 4 layers below furrows chlorenchymatous; rest of the  
cells oval to elongated, elliptical, thin walled and parenchymatous, with a few cells  
containing  rosette  crystals  of  calcium  oxalate;  endodermis  single  layered;  pericycle  
present in the form of a ring, single or groups of  2 to 4 fibres; anamolous secondary  
growth present; vascular bundles arranged in 2 or 3 rings showing included phloem  
alternating with parenchymatous tissue; phloem consists of sieve tubes, companion cells  
and phloem parenchyma; xylem composed of vessels, tracheids, wood fibres and xylem  
parenchyma; vessels round to oval having simple pits; pith wide consisting of circular to  
polygonal having intercellular spaces, rosette crystals of calcium oxalate present in this  
region. 
 
Leaf -
Petiole - Shows single layered epidermis covered with cuticle; trichomes multicellular  
present on both surfaces; cortex consisting of 2 or 3 layers, upper collenchymatous and  
lower parenchymatous; vascular bundle collateral and 3 in number; rosette crystals of  
calcium oxalate present in cortical cells.
Midrib  - Epidermis, cuticle and trichomes, similar to those in petiole; cortex 5 to 7  
layers,  upper  3  collenchymatous  and  lower  3  or  4  circular,  thin  walled  and  
parenchymatous; vascular bundles 3 in number, 2 accessory and one middle; xylem  
155towards the upper and phloem towards lower epidermis; rosette crystals of calcium  
oxalate present in cortical region. 
Lamina - Epidermis, cuticle and trichomes similar as in petiole and midrib; palisade 1  
or 2 layers; spongy parenchyma 3 to 5 layers composed of thin walled parenchymatous  
cells with intercellular spaces, a few rosette crystals of calcium oxalate present in  
spongy parenchyma; anomocytic stomata present on both surfaces; palisade ratio 2 or  
3; stomatal index on upper surface 12 to 15 and on lower surface 16 to 18; vein islet  
number 4 or 5 per square mm.
Powder  - Yellowish-green; under microscope shows straight walled epidermal cells,  
multicellular trichomes and anomocytic stomata in surface view; simple pitted vessels,  
cork cells, tracheids, fibres and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   17   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     11   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on silica gel 'G' plate using Toluene: Ethylacetate :  
Methanol (50: 50: 20) as mobile phase shows under UV (366 nm) ten fluorescent zones  
at Rf. 0.11 (sky blue), 0.27 (red), 0.47 (red), 0.51 (sky blue), 0.73 (sky blue), 0.82  
(pink), 0.87 (sky blue), 0.91 (red), 0.94 (red) and 0.97 (dark red). On spraying with  
Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for about ten minutes at  
105oC ten spots appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.23, 0.37, 0.51, 0.61,0.73, 0.85, 0.92 and 0.94 (all  
violet) and 0.97 (dark violet).
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  α- Amyrin and β - sitosterol, β - sitosterol palmitate, compesterol,  
chrysin, flavonoid glycosides and tannins.
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :K¤mighna, Kaphahara, V¡tahara, M£travirecana 
 
156IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  áat¡vary¡di Gh¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  A¿mar¢, M£trak¤cchra 
DOSE  -  50-100 ml in the form of decoction. 
   
  
15762. Pilu(Fr) 
PÌLÍH (Fruit) 
P¢l£h consists of fruit of Salvadora persica Linn. var.wightiana (Planch.ex Thw.)  
Verdc, syn.  S. persica  Linn. (Fam. Salvadoraceae), a perennial, woody, glabrous shrub,  
distributed in the arid tracts of Punjab and north western parts of India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Gu·aphala, Sr¡ns¢, Pil£ 
Assamese:Arak, Irak 
Bengali:Peelugachh, Jhal 
English:Salt bush, Toothbrush Tree 
Gujrati  :Peelu, Khareejal 
Hindi    :Pilu, Jhak, Peelu, Kharjal 
Kannada:Gonimara, Kankhina, Genumar 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Uka 
Marathi:Pilu, Khakhan 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Peelu 
Tamil   :Kotumaavali, Chittuva, Perungoli, Udhaiputtai 
Telugu  :Gogu, Varagogu, Gunia 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Fruits are 3 to 5 mm in diameter, ellipsoid-ovoid, occasionally with a small  
pedicel attached; surface greenish or greenish-brown to dark brown in colour, with  
irregular  wrinkles,  sometimes  shrunken;  pericarp  thin,  easily  separable,  exhibiting  
creamish to dull brown seed, odour characteristic and taste bitter.
b) Microscopic 
The epidermis is single layered consisting of thick walled, radially elongated  
cells covered externally with cuticle, the mesocarp differentiated into three zones, the  
outer and inner zone exhibiting thin walled parenchyma cells while a continuous zone of  
sclerenchymatous tissue with vascular bundles embedded in it is present in the middle  
region;  testa  shows  single  layered  epidermis  of  thin  walled  cells  followed  by  
parenchymatous  cells  of  the  embryo  containing  aleurone  grains  and  occasional  oil  
globules.
158Powder - Powder shows fragments of parenchymatous cells with aleurone grains and oil  
globules; scalariform, reticulate as well as border-pitted vascular elements; thick walled  
epidermal cells in surface view and sclereids. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   15   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     40   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on precoated Silica gel 'G' plate (Merck), using n-
Butanol; Acetic acid; water (4:1:5), in visible light shows three spots at Rf.0.23, 0.80  
(both light green) and 0.46 (light yellow); under UV (366 nm) two white spots appear at  
Rf.0.37 and 0.46; under UV (254nm) three spots appear at Rf.0.37 (white), 0.46 and 0.80  
(both pink), on exposure to Iodine vapours four yellow spots appear at Rf.0.10, 0.37,  
0.46 and 0.80, on spraying with vanillin sulphuric acid and heating the plate at  110oC 
for 10 minutes, six  spots appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.23 (both violet), 0.37, 0.40, 0.46 and 0.80  
(all orange).
  
CONSTITUENTS   -  β- sitosterol, sterol glycoside, benzyle isothioagnate, traces of  
alkaloid, fixed oil, sugar and fat, non-saponifiable portion of oil consists of dibenzylurea  
and dibenzlethiourea.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :áothahara,  Bhedana,  D¢pana,  Kaphahara,  Ras¡yana,  V¡tahara,  
Virecana, Vedn¡sth¡pana, áirovirccaka, Vid¡hi 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Mi¿rakasneha 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  A¿mar¢, Ar¿a, Ën¡ha, Gulma, Jvara, M£trak¤cchra, SarpaviÀa,  
Udararoga, ViÀavik¡ra, Bastivik¡ra 
DOSE  -  3-6 g.  
   
15963. Pilu(Lf) 
PÌLÍH (Leaf) 
P¢l£h consists of leaf of Salvadora persica Linn. var. wightiana (Planch. ex Thw.)  
Verdc, syn.  S. persica  Linn. (Fam. Salvadoraceae), a perennial, woody, glabrous shrub,  
distributed in the arid tracts of Punjab and north western parts of India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Gu·aphalah, Srans¢, Pilukah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Peelugaach, Jhaal 
English:Salt bush, Tooth brush Tree 
Gujrati  :Peelu, Khaaree jaal 
Hindi    :Jhak, Peelu, Pilu, Kharjaal 
Kannada:Genumar, Gonimara, Kankhina 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Uka 
Marathi:Khakhan, Pilu 
Oriya   :Kotungo, Toboto 
Punjabi:Peelu 
Tamil   :Chittuva, Kotumaavali, Perungoli, Uthaiputtai 
Telugu  :Gogu, Gunia, Varagogu 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaves are 3 to 10 cm in length and 1 to 4 cm in breadth, green, simple, stipulate,  
petiolate, oblong, ovate, margin entire, broad at base and acute at apex; veins prominent  
and raised on lower surface; both surfaces glabrous; taste and odour characteristic.
b) Microscopic 
160Petiole  -  Petiole  somewhat  circular  in  outline  with  a  large  crescent-shaped  
vascular bundle and two small vascular bundles fused together to form a central core of  
vascular  tissue;  the  presence  of  interxylary  phloem  indicates  anomalous  growth;  
epidermis single  layered, covered externally with thick  cuticle; cortex a wide zone  
consisting of circular to oval parenchyma cells; pericycle represented by small patches  
of thick walled and lignified fibres; phloem consists of usual elements traversed by uni  
or biseriate medullary rays; xylem consists of vessels, tracheids, fibres and parenchyma;  
vessels show scalariform thickening and border pitted walls, tracheids are bordered as  
well as simple pitted, parenchyma cells and fibres are simple pitted; interxylary phloem  
present in the central xlyem region; pith composed of thin walled parenchyma cells;  
rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals and starch grains present in the parenchyma cells of  
the cortex and pericyclic region
Midrib - Midrib shows single layered epidermis covered externally with thin cuticle on  
both the surfaces, except at a few places where a periclinal division is seen; cortex is a  
wide zone of  thin walled parenchyma cells, the centre of midrib is occupied  by a  
vascular cylinder consisting of a large crescent-shaped vascular bundle, the pericycle is  
represented by small patches of fibres, the phloem consists of usual elements, the xylem  
is  represented  by  vessels,  tracheids,  parenchyma  and  fibres;  interxylary  phloem  is  
present in the xylem region; the xylem is traversed by uniseriate medullary rays which  
become bi or tri seriate in the phloem region; rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals and a  
few starch grains are present in the parenchymatous cells of cortex and pericyclic region.
Lamina -  Lamina shows isobilateral structure; cuticle present, both epidermises are  
single  layered,  except  for  occasional  periclinal  division;  in  surface  view  both  the  
surfaces shows anisocytic and paracytic stomata; 2 or 3 layers of palisade cells are  
present below the upper and above the lower epidermis, remaining area being occupied  
by thin walled cells of pongy parenchyma; a number of small vascular bundle and  
vascular strand are distributed in the mesophyll of the lamina; idioblasts containing large  
rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals  are present beneath both the epidermises; rosettes of  
calcium oxalate crystals are also present in spongy  parenchyma and palisade cells;  
stomatal index 9  to 11 (upper surface) and 8 to 10 (lower surface); palisade ratio 5 to 6  
(upper surface) and 4 to 5 (lower surface); vein islet number 4 to 6 (upper surface) and 5  
to 7 (lower surface).
Powder - Pale green, shows presence of thin walled parenchyma cells several containing  
rosettes  of  calcium  oxalate  crystals  and  a  few  simple  starch  grains;  fragments  of  
epidermal cells showing anisocytic and paracytic stomata; fragment of scalariform and  
bordered pitted vessels, border and simple pitted tracheid, simple pitted parenchyma  
cells and thick walled fibres.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
161Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   27   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     40   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C.  of  alcoholic  extract  on  Silica  gel  'G'  plate  (Merck),  using  Toluene;  
Methanol (86:14), shows in visible light nine spots at Rf. 0.21, 0.25, 0.28(all green),  
0.45 (bright yellow), 0.60 (faint green), 0.72(dark green), 0.79, 0.85 and 0.94 (all green);  
under UV (254nm) twelve spots appear at Rf. 0.14 (faint orange), 0.21, 0.25, 0.28 (all  
orange), 0.36, 0.45 (both light orange), 0.53 (faint orange), 0.60, 0.72, 0.79 (all light  
orange), 0.85 and 0.94 (both orange); on exposure to Iodine vapours ten spots appear at  
Rf. 0.14 (yellow), 0.21, 0.25, 0.28 (all green), 0.53, 0.60, 0.72, 0.79 (all faint yellow),  
0.85, 0.94 (both bluish green), on spraying with sulphuric acid and heatin'G' plate at  
110°C for 30 minutes, twelve pots appear at Rf. 0.14 (yellow), 0.21, 0.25, 0.28 (all dark  
green), 0.36 (faint brown), 0.45 (brown), 0.53 (faint brown), 0.60 (violet), 0.72, 0.79  
(both faint brown), 0.85 (dark green) and 0.94 (blackish green).
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  β-sitosterol, glucotropaeolin, terpenes and flavonoids.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :ÙikÀ¸a, Laghu, Sara, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :áirovirecaka,  áothahara,  Bhedana,  D¢pana,  Kaphahara,  Ras¡yana,  
Vedan¡sth¡pana, Vid¡h¢, Virecana, V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  P¢l£ Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  A¿mar¢, Apac¢, Ar¿a, Bastivik¡ra, Bhagandara, Ën¡ha, Gulma,  
Jvara, K¤mi, M£trak¤cchra, N¡·¢vra¸a, Ud¡varta, Udararoga,  
V¡tarakta,  Vra¸a,  áarpavisa,  Yonivy¡pat,  DuÀ¶avrana,  
Vra¸¿otha,  Mukhap¡ka,  Madyaja  T¤À¸¡,  Plih¡roga,  Sarva  
KuÀ¶ha 
DOSE  -  3-6 g.  
   
  
16264. Pilu (Rt.Bk) 
PÌLÍH (Root) 
P¢l£h consists of root bark of  Salvadora persica  Linn. var. wightiana (Planch.ex  
Thw.) Verdc, syn.  S. persica  Linn. (Fam.Salvadoraceae), a perennial, woody, glabrous  
shrub, distributed in the arid tracts of Punjab and north western parts of India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Gu·aphalah, Pilukah, Srans¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Jhaal, Peelugaach 
English:Tooth brush Tree, Saltbush 
Gujrati  :Khaaree jaal, Peelu 
Hindi    :Jhak, Kharjaal, Peelu, Pilu 
Kannada:Genumar, Gonimara, Kankhina 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Uka 
Marathi:Khakhan, Pilu 
Oriya   :Kotungo, Toboto 
Punjabi:Peelu 
Tamil   :Chittuva, Kotumaavali, Perungoli, Uthaiputtai 
Telugu  :Gogu, Gunia, Varagogu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
The root bark is 2 to 3 mm thick, woody, channeled; pale brown with longitudinal  
wrinkles, exhibiting scars of roots and rootlets; inner surface creamish to yellowish-  
brown; fracture, short and smooth; odour, foetid and taste characteristic.
b) Microscopic 
The bark shows a wide zone of cork occupying half of the transection; cork cells  
differentiated into two zones, outer zone consisting of small rectangular cells whereas  
the  lower  cells  are  larger,  rectangular  and  tangentially  elongated;  phellogen  single  
layered; the phelloderm consist of 10 to 20 layers of thin walled tangentially elongated  
parenchyma cells with small intercellular spaces; it is followed by a wide phloem being  
traversed by 2 to 5 seriate medullary rays; the phloem consists of usual element, a few  
fibres and isolated  stone cells; several parenchyma cells are thick walled and arranged  
in somewhat radial rows in which stone cells  and fibres are scattered; prismatic crystals  
163of calcium oxalate are present in the parenchyma cells of outer phloem and phelloderm  
regions.
Powder -  Powder shows fragments of cork cells, thin walled parenchyma cells, thick  
walled and pitted parenchyma cells, prisms of calcium oxalate, fragment of thin walled  
fibres and stone cells, with thick walled and narrow central lumen.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   15   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     25   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 60 plate (Merck), using Chloroform:  
Toluene; Methanol (10:75:15), shows under UV (254nm) one yellow fluorescence spot  
at Rf.0.46; on exposure to Iodine vapours four yellow spots appear at Rf. 0.17, 0.30, 0.46  
and 0.67; on spraying with vanillin sulphuric acid and heating the plate at 110oC for 10 
minutes, seven spots appear at Rf. 0.11 (blue), 0.17, 0.23 (both violet), 0.30 (yellow),  
0.35, 0.46 and 0.67 (all blue).
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   β-sitosterol  and  elementral  γ-  monoclinic  sulphur  (S-8)  and  
glucotropaeolin isolated from root.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, Sara, Snigdha, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :áirovirecaka,  áothahara,  Bhedana,  D¢pana,  Kaphahara,  Ras¡yana,  
V¡tahara, Vedan¡sth¡pana, Vid¡h¢, Virecana 
 
164IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Ar¿aku¶h¡ra Rasa, Vaid£rya Rasayana, Chitrakhadiya  
Taila,  Triphal¡di  Gu¶ika,  Naracaka  C£r¸a,  
Vilvakhadhi Lepa, Pippaly¡di Gu¶ika 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  A¿mar¢, Ar¿a, Bastivik¡ra, Bhagandara, DuÀ¶avra¸a, Ën¡ha,  
Gulma,  Jvara,  K¤mi,  M£trakrcchra,  Madyaja  T¤À¸¡,  
Mukhap¡ka,  Pl¢h¡roga,  SarpaviÀa,  Ud¡varta,  Udararoga,  
V¡tarakta,  Vrana,  Yonivy¡pat,  N¡divra¸a,  Vrana¿otha,  
SarvakuÀ¶ha, Apac¢ 
DOSE  -  10-20 g for decoction. 
   
  
16565. Potagala (Rt) 
POÙAGALA (Root) 
Po¶agala consists of dried root of  Typha elephantina  Roxb. (Fam.Typhaceae), a  
perennial grass-like shrub, about 1.5-3.0 m in height and found throughout plains of India,  
in stagnant water and the sides of streams and marshes.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Erak¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Hogalaa 
English:Elephant grass 
Gujrati  :Ghaabaajariyu 
Hindi    :Pateraa, Erakaa 
Kannada:Apu, Jambuhullu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Raamabaan 
Oriya   :Hogala 
Punjabi:Boj, Bori, Patiraa 
Tamil   :Anaikkoria, Anaippul 
Telugu  :Enugajammu, Jammuguddi 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
The roots are upto 15 cm long and about 4 mm thick, arising in groups from the  
base  of  the  stem;  pale  brown  to  light  brown  in  colour,  irregularly  flattened  with  
longitudinal fissures giving rise to several secondary and tertiary rootlets from its lower  
end, transversely cut surface shows creamish to pale yellow central core; taste and odour  
indistinct.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows  single layered epidermis, followed by wide cortex which can be  
differentiated into three zones; the outer cortical cells, below the epidermis consist of 5  
to 7 layers of parenchyma cells arranged compactly followed by second zone consisting  
of circular to oval and tangentially elongated parenchyma cells; the central cortical  
region exhibits large air cavities lined by 1 or 2 layers of thin walled, compressed,  
narrow and radially elongated parenchyma cells - the trabiculae; the centre of the root  
exhibits a typical monocotyledonous structure consisting of alternating bands of xylem  
166and phloem surrounded externally by endodermis and pericycle; the cells of endodermis  
show thickening on radial and lower tangential walls; except phloem cells all the cells  
below  the   pericycle  are  thick  walled  and  lignified;  the  vascular  cylinder  exhibits  
presence of numerous very long fibres with narrow to negligible lumen;  the vessels  
show scalariform thickening whereas the tracheids have scalariform thickening or border  
pits; the parenchyma cells are radially elongated and simple pitted.
Powder - The powdered drug exhibits fragments of thin walled circular to oval and also  
radially  elongated  parenchyma  cells;  fragments  of  trabeculae;  fragments  of  fibres  
showing negligible to narrow lumen; scalariform vessels; scalariform and border-pitted  
tracheids and simple pitted thick walled parenchyma cells. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extracts on precoated Silica Gel 60 plate (Merck), using  
Chloroform: Toluene: Ethyl acetate: Formic acid (6:4:0.5), shows in visible light two  
spots at Rf. 0.89(light green) and 0.64(pale green); under U.V. (254nm) four spots  
appear at Rf.0.28(pinkish orange), 0.64(light orange), 0.78 and 0.81(both whitish); on  
exposures to iodine vapours 8 spots appear at Rf. 0.10, 0.19, 0.28, 0.45, 0.57, 0.64, 0.78  
and 0.93 (all yellow); on spraying with 5% ethanolic sulphuric acid and heating the plate  
at 110oC for 30 minutes 10 spots appear at Rf. 0.10(light violet), 0.19(violet), 0.28,  
0.45(both  faint  brown),  0.57(violet),  0.64(dark  brown),  0.78(blue),  0.81,  0.89  and  
0.93(all faint brown).
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  β-sitosterol, cholestrol, quercetin and lanosterol. 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :CakÀuÀya, Gr¡h¢, Kaphahara, M£trala, Pittahara, V¤Àya, Vra¸aropa¸a 
 
167IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Sukum¡ra Gh¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  A¿mar¢, áopha, D¡ha, M£trak¤cchra, Raktapitta, Raktavik¡ra,  
V¡tarakta, Visarpa, Vra¸a, Basti¿otha, áukradaurbalya 
DOSE  -  10-20 g for decoction.  
   
  
16866. Pudina(Aerialpart) 
PUDÌNËH (Aerial Part) 
Pud¢n¡h consists of the aerial part of  Mentha viridis  Linn. syn. M. spicata  var. 
viridis Linn. (Fam. Lamiaceae) a perennial, creeping aromatic herb of 30 to 90 cm high,  
widely cultivated throughout the plains of India for culinary and medicinal purposes.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:P£tih¡, Rocan¢, Pod¢nakah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Pudinaa 
English:Spear-Mint, Garden Mint 
Gujrati  :Phudino 
Hindi    :Pudeenaa 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Pudinaa 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Parari pudina 
Tamil   :Pudeenaa 
Telugu  :Pudeenaa 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug  consists  of  small  chopped  twigs;  leaves  opposite,  decussate,  shortly  
petiolate, petioles 2-mm long; mature leaves 2.5 to 3.5 cm long and 1.5 to 2.0 cm broad,  
very minutely hairy, ovate, apex acute, coarsely dentate, comparatively smoother and  
darker upper surface; stem square, minutely hairy, light brown to brown; flowers in  
loose cylindrical, slender spikes; awl like, throat of calyx naked, corolla smooth; seeds  
small, mucilaginous; aromatic odour and slightly pungent taste.
b) Microscopic 
Stem - T.S. shows quadrangular  outline with corner  ridges and thin cuticle;  
epidermal cells tabular, multicellular uniserate trichomes present, cortex 8 to 9 cells  
deep below ridges, while 2 to 3 cells deep elsewhere, variable in size; endodermis single  
layer; pericycle broken, consisting of sclerenchymatous cells; phloem 2 to 4 cells deep  
and made up of irregular shaped cells; xylem vessels 26 to 46 µ in dia; pith present.
169Leaf - 
Midrib: T.S.  shows  protruded  mid  rib  towards  the  lower  surface;  compact  
parenchymatous cells enclose a crescent-shaped vascular bundle; collenchymatous cells  
are absent. 
Lamina: Dorsiventral, epidermal cell walls of both the surfaces in the surface view are  
wavy, stomata diacytic; covering trichomes present on the lower surface, uniseriate, 1 to  
4 cells long, 42 to 350 µ in size with pointed apex; glandular trichomes 64 to 80 µ in 
diam. with a single basal cell and a head of 8 cells, found in depression of the epidermis;  
a single row of palisade cells towards the upper side followed by spongy parenchyma 3  
to 4 cells deep; palisade ratio 6 to 8; vein islet number 18 to 20; stomatal index for upper  
epidermis 10 to 20, lower epidermis 15 to 30. 
Powder  -  Blackish-brown,  fibrous,  free  flowing,  characterized  by  the  presence  of  
uniseriate non-glandular hairs (112 to 350 µ), glandular trichomes 64 to 80 µ in diam, 
diacytic stomata, epidermal cell walls wavy.
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   14   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Essential oil                              Not less than     0.2  per cent, Appendix    2.2.10 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of essential oil on silica gel 'G' plate using hexane : ethyl acetate (90:10)  
shows eight spots at Rf  0.28, 0.33, 0.38, 0.49, 0.55, 0.66, 0.80 and 0.88 on spraying with  
Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for 15 minutes at 110oC.
 
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Essential oil (0.2 to 0.8 percent) containing terpene such as carvone  
(60%) and limonene (10%) as major constituents.
 
 
170PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Balya, D¢pana, Kaphahara, M£trala, V¡tahara, Rocana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Pud¢n¡rka 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  J¢r¸a Jvara, á£la, Agnim¡ndya, Aj¢r¸a, Aruci, Atis¡ra, áv¡sa,  
Chardi,  Ëdhm¡na,  Hikk¡,  K¡sa,  K¤mi,  M£trak¤cchra,  
KaÀ¶h¡rtava,  Pras£t¢jvara,  Mada,  Visucik¡,  Graha¸i,  
Vaktraj¡·ya, Jvara 
DOSE  -  5-10 ml patra svarasa. 
        20-40 ml ph¡¸¶a. 
       1-3 drops taila. 
   
  
17167. Pullani(Lf)  
PULLËNÌ (Leaf) 
Pull¡n¢ consists of leaf of  Calycopteris floribunda  Lam. (Fam. Combretaceae), a  
scandent shrub, distributed in the deciduous forests of western Peninsula.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Pull¡n¢, Toyavall¢, K¡ravelli 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Kokkarai 
Kannada:Marsadabaguli, Enjarige Kubsa 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Pullaani, Varavalli 
Marathi:Ukshi, Bogull 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Minnaarukoti, Pillani, Therulankodl 
Telugu  :Bandimurududu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
The leaves are 7 to 12 cm by 4 to 6 cm ovate-lanceolate or elliptic-oblong, acute  
or acuminate, petiole 0.5 cm to 1.0 cm long; upper surface dull green, lower pale brown  
with prominent veins, both surfaces hairy; taste, astringent and odour characteristic.
b) Microscopic 
Leaf -
Petiole -  The transverse section exhibits  a single  layered epidermis  with  numerous  
unicellular covering as well as short stalked or sessile glandular trichomes with 12 to 16  
celled head; wide cortex consisting of thin walled parenchymatous cells; a crescent  
shaped vascular bundle consisting of usual elements, surrounded dorsally as well as  
laterally by a sheath of fibres is present in the centre of petiole; rosettes of calcium  
oxalate crystals are seen in some of the cortical cells.
172Midrib - The transverse section shows single layered epidermis covered externally with  
cuticle; long, unicellular covering as well as short stalked or sessile glandular hairs with  
12 to 16 heads present on both the surfaces; cortex consisting of thin walled parenchyma  
cells; a crescent shaped vascular bundle consisting of usual elements surrounded by a  
continuous ring of fibres present in the center of the cortex, rosettes of calcium oxalate  
crystals found in some of the cortical parenchyma cells.
Lamina - The epidermal cells have wavy outline in surface view; anamocytic stomata  
present on lower surface only; unicellular, long covering trichomes as well as glandular  
hair  similar  to  those  described  under  petiole,  present  on  both  surfaces  but  more  
pronounced on lower side.
The transverse section shows dorsiventral structure with two layers of palisade  
cells below the upper epidermis; mesophyll represented by cells of spongy parenchyma  
and small vascular bundles and vascular strands; rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals  
seen in some of the cells of spongy parenchyma; stomatal index 23 to 29; palisade ratio 4  
to 7 and vein islet number 5 or 6. 
Powder - Pale green; shows fragments of upper epidermal cells with covering as well as  
glandular  trichomes;  lower  epidermal  cells  with  stomata,  covering  and  glandular  
trichomes, fragments of fibres, reticulate and scalariform vascular elements; scattered  
covering and glandular trichomes and parenchyma cells with rosettes of calcium oxalate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     8    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on precoated Silica gel 'G' plate (Merck), using Ethyl  
acetate: Methanol: Water (8:11:8) shows in visible light six spots at Rf. 0.13 (light  
brown), 0.49 (yellow), 0.61 (pale yellow), 0.71 (light yellow), 0.92 (dark yellow) and  
0.96 (light orange); under U.V. (254 nm) four spots appear at Rf. 0.61, 0.71 (both white),  
0.92 (yellow) and 0.96 (orange); on exposure to Iodine vapours five spots appear at Rf.  
0.44, 0.61, 0.71 (all yellow), 0.92 (brown) and 0.96 (dark yellow); on spraying with  
vanillin sulphuric acid and heating the plate at 110oC for 10 minutes, six spots appear at  
Rf.0.13, 0.44 (both faint brown), 0.61 (violet), 0.71 (faint brown), 0.92 (black) and 0.96  
(dark green).
173 CONSTITUENTS  -  Octacesanol, sitosterol, calycopterin, 3'0-Methylcalycopterin, 4-0  
methylcalycopterin, ellagic acid quercetin and proanthocyanidin.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara, Pittahara, Bhedini, Vibandhahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Marma Gu¶ik¡ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Jvara, K¤mi, KuÀ¶ha, P¡¸·u 
DOSE  -  3-6 g.  
   
  
17468. Pullani(LRt)  
PULLËNÌ (Root) 
Pull¡n¢ consists of root of Calycopteris floribunda Lam (Fam. Combretaceae), a
scandent shrub, distributed in the deciduous forests of western peninsula.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:K¡ravelli, Pull¡n¢, Toyavall¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Kokkarai 
Kannada:Enjarige Kubsa, Marsadabaguli 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Pullaani, Varavalli 
Marathi:Bogull, Ukshi 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Minnaarukoti, Pillani, Therulankodl 
Telugu  :Bandimurududu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
The roots are upto 3 cm. in diameter occasionally with attached rootlets, surface  
with fine longitudinal wrinkles, buff brown to greyish-brown, bark very thin; fracture,  
tough and fibrous; taste and odour indistinct.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. shows narrow cork consisting of tangentially elongated cells, phelloderm is a  
narrow zone represented by thin walled and tangentially elongated parenchyma cells;  
phloem is composed of soft tissues; xylem is a solid cylinder consisting of vessels and  
tracheids showing bordered pits and reticulate thickening, simple pitted parenchyma  
cells and fibres; patches of interxylary phloem of soft tissues are seen in xylem region,  
the medullary rays are uniseriate; rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals are present in some  
of the parenchyma cells of phloem and interxylary phloem.
175Powder - Powder shows fragments of cork cells, parenchyma cells containing rosettes of  
calcium oxalate crystals, scattered rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals and fragments of  
vessels and tracheids showing bordered pits and reticulate thickening.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   2.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' precoated plates (Merck), using Ethyl  
acetate:Methanol;Water (8:11:8) shows under UV (254nm) two spots at Rf.0.39 and  
0.71(both faint blue); on spraying with 5% ethanolic sulphuric acid and heating the plate  
at 110oC for 30 minutes, three spots  appear at Rf. 0.39, 0.71 (both faint brown) and 0.88  
(violet).
  
CONSTITUENTS   -  Octacesanol, sitosterol, calycopterin, 3'0-methylcalycopterin, 4-0  
methylcalycopterin, ellagic acid, gossoypol and quercetin.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Bhedini, Kaphahara, Pittahara, Vibandhahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Marma Gu¶ik¡ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Jvara, K¤mi, KuÀ¶ha, P¡¸·u 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
17669. Pullani(St)  
PULLËNÌ (Stem) 
Pull¡n¢ consists of stem of Calycopteris floribunda Lam. (Fam. Combretaceae), a  
scandent shrub, distributed in the deciduous forests of western peninsula.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:K¡ravelli, Pull¡n¢, Toyavall¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Kokkarai 
Kannada:Enjarige Kubsa, Marsadabaguli 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Pullaani, Varavalli 
Marathi:Bogull, Ukshi 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Minnaarukoti, Pillani, Therulankodl 
Telugu  :Bandimurududu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Pieces of stem cylindrical, about 8 to 10 mm thick, surface light brown, smooth;  
bark thin, easily separable; fracture hard and fibrous; taste and odour indistinct.
b) Microscopic 
T.S.  of  stem  shows  narrow  cork  consisting  of  rectangular  and  tangentially  
elongated cells, phelloderm exhibits 5 to 8 layers of thin walled parenchymatous cells;  
phloem is composed of soft tissues being traversed by uniseriate medullary rays;  xylem  
is a wide zone consisting of scalariform and reticulate vessels with transverse or lateral  
wall perforations and tracheids, simple pitted fibres and parenchyma cells; medullary  
rays are uniseriate; patches of interxylary phloem made up of soft tissues are seen in this  
region; intraxylary phloem is present at the periphery of pith; the pith consists of thin  
walled parenchyma cells with isolated stone cells; rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals  
scattered in phloem and interxylary phloem.
177Powder - Light brown; shows fragments of vascular elements, scalariform and reticulate  
vessels and tracheids, stone cells, pitted fibres and parenchyma, thin walled parenchyma  
cells, parenchyma cells with rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals and isolated rosettes of  
calcium oxalate crystals.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     2.5  per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' precoated plates (Merck), using Ethyl  
acetate:Methanol:Water  (8:11:8)  shows  in  visible  light  two  spots  at  Rf.  0.89  (light  
yellow) and 0.94 (dark yellow); under UV (254nm) four spots appear at Rf. 0.30, 0.51,  
0.58 (all light blue) and 0.89 (yellow); on exposure to Iodine vapours four spots appear  
at Rf. 0.34, 0.51, 0.58 and 0.89 (all yellow); on spraying with 5% ethanolic sulphuric  
acid and heating the plate at 110oC for 30 minutes, five spots  appear at Rf. 0.34, 0.51,  
0.58, 0.89 (all faint brown) and 0.94 (black).
 
 CONSTITUENTS  -  Octacesanol, sitosterol, calycopterin, 3'0-Methylcalycopterin, 4-0  
methylcalycopterin, ellagic acid.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Bhedini, Kaphahara, Pittahara, Vibandhahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Marma Gu¶ik¡ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Jvara, K¤mi, KuÀ¶ha, P¡¸·u 
DOSE  -  3-6 g.  
   
  
17870. Putikaranja(St.Bk) 
PÍTÌKARAØJA (Stem Bark) 
P£t¢karaµja  is  the  dried  stem  bark  of  Caesalpinia  crista  Linn.  (Fam. 
Caesalpiniaceae); a prickly, shruby climber found throughout India upto an altitude of  
1200 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Cirabilvah, P£t¢kah, Prakiryah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:Indian elm 
Gujrati  :Charela, Kanajho 
Hindi    :Chilbil, Kanju, Banchillaa, Paapari 
Kannada:Tapasigida 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Avil, Nettavil 
Marathi:Baavalaa 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Chirbil 
Tamil   :Avali, Aapa 
Telugu  :Tapasi, Nemalinara 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark curved, 0.8 to 1.5 mm thick, dark reddish or nearly blackish in colour with a  
number of sharp prickles; inner surface light brown to dark brown and smooth; fracture,  
short; odourless; slightly astringent in taste.
b) Microscopic 
Stem bark- T.S. of stem bark consists of layers of radially tiered cork, covered by  
degenerated dark layers of dead cells of cork, followed by 16 to 22 layers of phelloderm;  
phelloderm cells are thin walled, parenchymatous; some cells are filled with starch  
grains that are spherical, variable in size measuring from 1.5 to 5  µm, with a centric  
hilum; rosettes or prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate also present; stone cells are  
present in the form of a continuous ring; secondary phloem consists of companion cells,  
sieve cells; phloem parenchyma and thick walled phloem fibres in groups, traversed by  
medullary rays; simple, rarely compound starch grains  and clusters crystals of calcium  
oxalate also found in secondary phloem region. 
179Powder-  Light brown, easily flowable, taste-slightly astringent, odourless; shows the  
presence of simple to compound starch grains composed of 2 to 4 components; prismatic  
and rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals; cork in surface view, sclereids, phloem fibres,  
parenchymatous cells contains prismatic and clusters of calcium oxalate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of stem bark powder on Silica gel 'G' plate using  
Toluene: Formic acid: Glacial acetic acid (82: 14.5: 4.5) under UV light (365 nm)  
shows one fluorescent zone at Rf. 0.70 (green). On exposure to iodine vapour, six  
spots appear at Rf. 0.06, 0.25, 0.68, 0.72, 0.86 and 0.95 (all yellow).
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Flavonoid, Saponins and Alkaloids.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :áothahara, Bhedan¢ya, D¢pana, K¤mighna, áleÀmasaÆ¿amana, Anul
°mana, Lekhan¢ya, ViÀghna, Ap¡r¡patana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  ViÀ¸u Taila, Induk¡nta Gh¤ta, Pramehamihira Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Ar¿a, ávitra, Gulma, Ka¸·u, KuÀ¶ha, Prameha, Tvakroga, Udara,  
Vra¸a,  Pakva-áopha,  Sl¢pada,  V¡taja  áula,  áula,  Mas£rik¡,  
Amlapitta, áarira-Durgandha 
DOSE  -  50-100 ml. in the form of decoction. 
   
  
18071. Renuka (Fr) 
RÓÛUKA (Seed) 
Re¸uk¡  consists of dried fruit of Vitex negundo Linn. (Fam. Verbenaceae) a small  
tree with triplicate to pentafoliate leaves and bluish inflorescence, found throughout India. 
Note : 'Renuka' is the fruit of Vitex agnus-castus Linn., a plant of foreign origin according  
to the AFI. However, since they are not available in the market, the recognised substitute  
fruits of Vitex negundo have been taken here as Renuka. 'Nirgundi' is the dried leaf of  
Vitex negundo
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:R¡japutr¢,  Nandin¢,  Kapil¡,  Dvij¡,  Bhasmagandh¡,  P¡¸·upatr¢,  
Hare¸uk¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Renuka, Kauntee, Renuka Beej 
English:Chaste-Tree, Hemp-Tree 
Gujrati  :Harenu, Renuka 
Hindi    :Renukaa, Renuka, Sambhaalooka Beej 
Kannada:Renuka 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Renuka Beej 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Yettee 
Telugu  :Jeevakamu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
The fruit is a rounded drupe, 1 to 3 mm in diameter, 1/3 rd to 3/4 th of its size  
surrounded by a dull grey cup like, persistent calyx alongwith pedicel; calyx cup may  
show one or two vertical splits; fruit colour light brown to black; locules two, each  
containing two seeds; texture smooth, taste and odour not characteristic.
b) Microscopic 
Fruit shows a circular outline; the outermost layer consists of compact, rounded  
or barrel shaped epidermals cells; epidermis bears abundant, characteristic bicelled, bent  
or  wavy trichomes; distal cell of the trichomes generally broken; the subepidermal  
181ground tissue comprising the mesocarp, composed of thin walled, angular cells which  
overarch between the two loculi of the fruit at the distal end; mesocarp also contains a  
ring of vascular strands; thick walled lignified cells inner to mesocarp comprise the  
endocarp;  each  loculus  contains  l  or  2  flattened  seeds;  calyx  consists  of  an  outer  
epidermal layer of small cells followed by a central tissue of thin walled angular cells.
Powder -The powder shows stone cells, bicellular trichomes and groups of vessels with  
scalariform thickenings beside tissue fragments comprising both thin and thick walled  
cells.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using chloroform : methanol (8-2), shows under U.V. (366nm) spots at Rf. 0.36 (Blue),  
0.52 (Yellowish green), 0.57 (Bluish green), 0.63 (Bluish green), 0.71 (Blue), 0.84  
(Blue), 0.93 (Bluish green); on spraying with anisaldehyde- sulphuric acid reagent and  
heating the plate for ten minutes at110oC under U.V. (366nm) spots appear at Rf. 0.04  
(Greyish Black), 0.58 (Blue), 0.73 (Blue), 0.90 (Blue), 0.97 (Yellow).
T.L.C. of the n-Hexane extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick) using  
chloroform : ethylacetate (95:5) shows under U.V. (366nm) spots at Rf 0.13 (Green),  
0.27 (Green), 0.34 (Green), 0.44 (Green), 0.51 (Green), 0.66 (Green), 0.77 (Green), 0.84  
(Green), 0.90 (Dark Green); on spraying with anisaldehyde: sulphuric acid reagent and  
heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 ° C under U.V. (366nm)  spots appear at Rf 0.13  
(Yellow), 0.27 (Yellow), 0.34 (orange yellow), 0.44 (Light yellow), 0.51 (Greenish  
Yellow), 0.65 (Pale yellow), 0.77 (pale yellow), 0.84 (Yellow), 0.90 (Yellow).
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   Seeds  contain  hydrocarbons  such  as  n-tritriacontane,  n-
hentriacontane,  n-pentatriacontane  and  nonacosane.  Other  
constituents  of  the  seeds  include  β-  sitosterol,  p-
hydroxybenzoic acid and 5 oxyisophthalic acid.
 
 
182PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pan¢, Kaphahara, Medhya, P¡can¢, V¡tahara, ViÀaghna, Pittakara,  
Garbhap¡tin¢, Mukhavaimalyakara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Pramehamihira Taila, V¡s¡candan¡di Taila, Candan¡di  
Taila,  Da¿am£lariÀ¶a,  S¡rsvat¡riÀ¶a,  Mah¡yogar¡ja  
Guggulu, A¸utaila, Bal¡¿vagandha L¡kÀ¡di Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  D¡ha, Dadru, Daurbalya, Gulma, K¡sa, Ka¸·u, Netraroga, T¤Àn¡,  
Klaibya 
DOSE  -  1-3 g. 
   
  
18372. Riddhi (tuber) 
RIDDHI (Tuber) 
Riddhi consists of dried tuber of Habenaria intermedia D.Don (Fam. Orchidaceae);  
a glabrous, small, erect, herbaceous plant found in temperate Himalayas, upto 2000 m  
commercial samples are usually processed in steam or boiling water and dried before  
marketing.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:A¿v¡sin¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :-- 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:-- 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :-- 
Telugu  :Jeevakamu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Unprocessed tubers are 1.5 to 3.5 cm long and 1.0 to 2.5 cm thick, oval, obovate  
or  oblong  in  shape;  buff  to  yellowish  brown,  with  shrunken  surface,  covered  with  
numerous fine hairs; internally white to creamish in colour; showing scars of aerial  
portion at the apex and beaked or sometime round base; odourless; taste, palatable and  
mucilaginous.
Processed tubers; with scar or attached stem on top; 1.5 to 3.0 cm in length and 0.5 to  
1.5 cm in width, conical, tapering to a beaked base, surface rough, occasionally grooved,  
grayish-brown;  very  hard  to  break;  fractured  surface  show  creamy  interior;  taste  
palatable and mucilaginous; odourless.
 
184b) Microscopic 
T.S. of unprocessed tuber shows 2 to 3 layered epidermis with long unicellular  
hairs, followed by a distinct exodermis and 15 to 20 layers of cortical parenchyma, cells  
of which in proximity of exodermis are smaller as compared to the remaining cells of  
cortex region; a few parenchymatous cells of outer cortex contain bundles of rephides. It  
is followed by a typical polystelic condition consisting of 14 to 16 diarch steles arranged  
in a ring and 7 to 10 steles distributed among the parenchyma in the central region;  
schizogenous mucilage canals lined by an epithelium of usually 6 to 9 cells are found  
distributed throughout the parenchymatous tissue; small and large starch grains mostly  
of simple type are found distributed in abundance throughout the parenchyma as well as  
in the epithelial cells of mucilage canals; the smaller ones are mostly found with hilum  
as a point or cleft and large one are round to oval with centrally situated hilum in the  
form of a point or cleft or triangular or 2 to 3 stellate cleft.
The processed tubers show no anatomical changes except the gelatinized starch  
grains.
Powder - The powder shows the presence of a large number of starch grains, long needle  
shaped  raphides  in  bundles  or  isolated;  fragments  of  root  hairs,  mucilage  canals,  
parenchymatous cells and vessels with scalariform thickening.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     22   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of  alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G'  precoated plates (Merck), using  
Toluene : Methanol (84:16) shows in visible light four  spots at Rf. 0.41, 0.35 (both light  
yellow, 0.22 and 0.16 (both pink); under UV rays (254nm) three spots appear at Rf. 0.79  
(white),  0.67 (dark blue) and 0.39 (yellow), on exposure to iodine vapours five spots  
appear at Rf.0.79, 0.41, 0.35, 0.22 and 0.16 (all yellow); on spraying with 5% vanillin  
sulphuric acid and heating the plate at 110 °C for 10 minutes, nine spots  appear at Rf.  
0.79, 0.67, 0.61, 0.41, 0.39, 0.35, 0.22 and 0.19 ( all pink) and 0.16 (violet).
 
 
 
185PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Picchila, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :Pittahara,  Ras¡yana, TridoÀa¿¡maka,  V¡tahara, V¤Àya,  áukrajanana,  
Ojovardhaka 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -   A¿oka  Gh¤ta,  Am¤tapr¡¿a  Gh¤ta,  Da¿am£l¡riÀ¶a,  
Ch¡gal¡dya Gh¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Jvara, KÀaya, Raktavik¡ra, M£rcch¡ 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
18673. Rohisha(Wh.Pl) 
ROHÌâA (Whole Plant) 
Roh¢Àa consists of dried leaf, stem and root of Cymbopogon martinii (Roxb.) Wats. 
(Fam. Poaceae) a perennial, sweet scented grass, 1.5 to 3.5 m high, occurs wild in dry  
localities and cultivated in many parts of India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:-- 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Agam Ghaas, Agiyaa Ghaas 
English:Rosha Grass, Rusa grass 
Gujrati  :Rondso, Ronsdo 
Hindi    :Rohis, Roosaa, Roosaaghaas, Mirchagandha 
Kannada:Dunllu, Harehullu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Sambhaarppullu 
Marathi:Rohish gavat 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Agya ghass 
Tamil   :Kaavattampillu, Munkipul, Chooraippul 
Telugu  :Kaamakchhi - Kassuvu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Root - Short, stout and woody; roots fibrous; many culms arise from root stumps.
Culm - Erect, terete, smooth shiny, upto 6 mm in dia., internodes 5 to 16 cm long, solid.
Leaf - Blades linear-lanceolate or lanceolate tapering to long filiform acuminate point,  
cordate and amplexicaul at base, upto 50 cm long and 3.5 cm broad; upper leaves are  
smaller, leaf surface glabrous, margin scabrid; midrib prominent and protruded on the  
lower surface; leaf sheath shorter than the internodes, glabrous, striate, auriculate, tight  
and clasping the culm, ligules membranous, 2 to 3 cm long.
Inflorescence - Spathate panicle, compound, upto 30 cm long; primary axis bears 2 or 3  
branches at each node, these end in a spatheole which bears a pair of racemes, spatheole  
1.8 mm long become reddish at maturity; racemes 1.5-2.0 cm long become subsessile or  
shortly pedicelled, lower raceme base and lower most pedicel swollen; sessile spikelet  
187about 3.5 mm long, lower glume 1 mm wide, ovate, with deep median groove, broadly  
winged,  2  nerved;  awn  12  to  18  mm  long;  pedicellate  spikelet  about  4  mm  long,  
glabrous; lower glume lanceolate, 8 nerved, flower hermaphrodite or male, stamens-3,  
anthers 1 or 2 mm long, style 2, stigma pilose.
b) Microscopic 
Root - T.S. shows thin walled epiblema with unicellular root hairs; cortex composed of  
thin walled, parenchymatous cells; large air chambers present in the cortex; endodermis  
single layered and pericycle two cell layered; central vascular strand has outer 2 or 3  
layers of sclerenchymatous cells followed by 3 to 5 cells deep zones of thin walled  
phloem with a row of circular cavities of 12 to 25 µ diam.; 5 to 10 cell layer thick zone  
encloses xylem vessels; which are 35 to 50 µ in diam.; pith cells thick walled and devoid  
of any cell contents.
Stem - T.S. shows thick cuticle; epidermis devoid of any appendages; hypodermis 6 to  
10  cells  deep  and  composed  of  sclerenchymatous  cells;  vascular  bundles  scattered  
throughout the ground tissue with a row of smaller vascular bundles in the hypodermis;  
cells of ground tissue thin walled, parenchymatous; vascular bundles present in the  
ground tissue enclosed by 2 or 3 layers of sclerenchymatous cells. 
Leaf -  T.S. shows  isobilateral structure, with a spongy  mesophyll  between; outline  
showing a slightly concave upper surface and a convex lower surface; midrib protruded  
towards lower side; cells of upper epidermis interrupted by the presence of bulliform or  
motor cells; lower epidermal cells are more uniform in size and smaller; stomata present  
on both surfaces, characteristically placed in a straight line between veins, mesophyll  
consists  of chlorenchymatous cells placed radially around smaller vascular bundles;  
bundle sheath present around smaller vascular bundles, on either side of the midrib  
vascular  bundle;  group  of  sclerenchymatous  fibres  are  found  and  may  extend  upto  
bundle  sheath;  vascular  bundle  of  midrib  usually  has  two  conspicuous  metaxylem  
vessels.
Lower epidermis can be distinguished from the upper epidermis by its having  
more number of stomata, smaller epidermal cells and presence of microhairs and  
papillae; stomata of the lower epidermis - oval, mostly with low dome shaped long cells  
present between the veins; long cells of lower epidermis possess 1 or 2 papillae, while  
papillae are absent on the long cells of upper epidermis; short cells over the veins in  
rows of more than 5 cells and may be in pairs; silica bodies abundant over the veins  
mostly dumbbell shaped, occasionally cross-shaped, narrow and crenate; prickle and  
micro hairs present; micro hairs two celled, observed only on lower epidermis; the basal  
cell of micro hairs is wide as compared to distal cell; distal cell tapers to an acutely  
pointed apex.
188Powder - Brown, fibrous, free flowing, shows debris from leaves showing characteristic  
graminaceous stomata, silica bodies, and micro hairs; also contains pitted parenchyma  
and fiber.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   14   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Essential oil                              Not less than     0.2  per cent, Appendix    2.2.10 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of essential oil on silica gel 'G' plate using hexane : ethyl acetate (90:10)  
shows seven spots at Rf  0.25, 0.38, 0.47, 0.57, 0.64, 0.71 and 0.78 on spraying with  
Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for 15 minutes at 110oC.
  
CONSTITUENTS   -  Essential oil (0.5 percent) containing terpenes such as geraniol,  
geranyl acetate, citronellol, linalool, geranyl butyrate, myrcene, α- 
and β-pinene.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Pittahara, Kaphav¡ta¿¡maka, B¡lagrahahara, PuÆstvaghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Bal¡ Taila, M¡sabal¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  á£la, Apasm¡ra, Aruci, H¤droga, Jvara, K¡sa, KuÀ¶ha, Prameha,  
Raktapitta, Pinasa, Kaphajvara, Ka¸¶ha Roga, Ka¶i¿£la, V¤Àcika-
ViÀa 
DOSE  -  10-20 g.   
   
  
18974. Rumimastagi (Resin) 
RÍMÌMASTAGÌ (Resin) 
R£m¢mastag¢  is  a  resin  obtained  from  Pistacia  lentiscus  Linn.  (Fam. 
Anacardiaceae),   a  shrub  or  small tree  indigenous  to  the  countries  bordering  on  the  
Mediterranean.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:-- 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Rumi-Mastungi 
English:Mastic 
Gujrati  :Rumi Mastagee 
Hindi    :Rumi Mastagee, Rumi Mastiki, Mastagee 
Kannada:--- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Rumaa Mastakee 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :-- 
Telugu  :Jeevakamu 
Urdu    :Rumee Mastagee 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
The resin occurs in small, hard, pear shaped, ovoid or nearly globular, sometimes  
elongated tears, about 2 to 8 mm in diameter; pale yellow in colour; brittle, breaking into  
clear glossy fracture, interior transparent, crushing to a sandy powder, taste, slightly  
agreeable; odour, aromatic.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   2.6  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.34 per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     94   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     0.5  per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
190ASSAY 
The drug on steam distillation yields colourless oil (1.5-2.0% v/w), which is heavier than  
water. (Method in Appendix 2.2.10.).
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of  alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G'  precoated plates (Merck), using  
Toluene  :  Methanol  (95:5);  under  UV  (254nm)  shows  one  spot  at  Rf.  0.17  (blue  
fluorescence):  on spraying with Vanillin-sulphuric acid and heating the plate at 110oC 
for 30 minutes, twelve spots  appear at Rf. 0.12, 0.17, 0.23 (all violet), 0.40 (blue), 0.41  
(purple), 0.44, 0.46, 0.49, 0.56, 0.69, 0.80 and 0.86 (all blue). 
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Resin, volatile oil, a bicyclic terpenoid and fatty acids.
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :D¢pana, Kaphahara, M£trala, V¤Àya, Var¸ya, V¡j¢kara¸a, Rakta  Sa
´gr¡hika, Mukhadurgandhan¡¿aka, Da¿ansthirat¡kara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Eladi, Kameda, Sukrama Vati 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  Agnim¡ndya, áotha, áv¡sa, Ëdhm¡na, Graha¸¢, K¡sa, M£trak
¤cchra, Raktasr¡va, V¡tapittaja Vik¡ra 
DOSE  -  1-2 g. 
   
  
19175. Sarala (Exudate ) 
SARALA (Exudate) 
Sarala is an exudate obtained by tapping the wood of Pinus roxburghii Sargent s yn. 
P.  longifolia  Roxb.  (Fam.  Pinaceae),  a  monoecious  conifer  found  in  north-western  
Himalayas at an altitude between 460 and 1500 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:árih, ár¢veÀ¶aka, ár¢v¡sah, áriniketah, áry¡hvhah, V¤kÀadh£pakah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Sarala gaachh 
English:Oleo-resine of Pine 
Gujrati  :Teliyo devdaar, Pilo berajo 
Hindi    :Cheed-Ka-Gond, Gandhabirojaa 
Kannada:Saral, Sriveshtaka 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Charalam, Saralam 
Marathi:Sarala deeka 
Oriya   :Sidhaa, Saral 
Punjabi:Cheed 
Tamil   :Pinaimaaru 
Telugu  :Saral 
Urdu    :Cheed 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Blackish brown in colour, semi solid, mostly associated with debris from needles,  
wood chips and bark of the source tree; odour, terebinthene.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   0.6  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.4  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     74   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     0.15 per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Volatile oil                               Not less than     18   per cent, Appendix    2.2.10 
 
192ASSAY 
G.L.C. -
G.L.C. of Turpentine oil on the Gas Chromatograph Model NUCON - 5765, Column &  
Stationary phase : 30m fused silica capillary column walls coated with FFAP, Carrier  
Gas : Helium, 1.5 ml. min-1, Column Temperature : 90 ° C for 2 min. then programmed  
at the rate of 7° C min-1 to 220° C, Injection port Temperature : 220 ° C, Detector 
Temperature :  240 ° C, Recorder  :  2mV,  signal  attenuation  1:100,  Chart  speed  :  1  
cm.min-1, Sample size : 0.10 ml (For GC analyses, pure (0.1ml) is injected with a 1.0  
ml syringe).
The identification of compounds is done by comparing the retention time of peaks and  
by  peak  enrichment  technique  with  standard  samples  run  under  similar  operating  
conditions such as l- α- pinene (Rt = 6.31 min.); l- β-pinene (Rt = 7.18 min.); car-3-ene  
(Rt = 7.76 min.); longifolene (Rt = 15.46 min.).
 T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of rosin (Material left after separation of essential oil) on a precoated  
silica gel G plate, using methanol : hexane (5:95). One spot at Rf. 0.80 on spraying with  
2% vanillin in sulfuric acid (dark pink to purple flourescent) and on spray with 0.04 per  
cent bromocresol green solution shows yellow spot.
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  l-α-pinene, l-β-pinene, car-3-ene, longifolene and other mono &  
sesquiterpenes.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pana, Kaphahara, RakÀoghna, V¡tahara, ViÀaghna, Durgandhahara,  
DuÀ¶avra¸a¿odhaka, Var¸apras¡dana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Am¤taprasa C£r¸a, KuÀ¶adi Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  Agnim¡ndya, Ëdhm¡na, Grahab¡dh¡, K¤miroga, Ka¸¶haroga,  
Ka¸·u,  Ko¶ha,  KuÀ¶ha,  M£rcch¡,  Sotha,  Tvakroga,  
Urustambha, V¡tavy¡dhi,  YonidoÀa, Jatr£rdhavaroga, Sveda-
Daurgandhya, Kar¸a¿£la, N¡·ivrana, Pi·ak¡, Y£karoga 
DOSE  -  1-3 g. 
19376. Sarpagandha(Rt) 
SARPAGANDHË (Root) 
Sarpagandh¡ consists of air dried root of  Rauwolfia serpentina  (Linn.) Benth. ex 
Kurz (Fam. Apocynaceae); a perennial undershrub widely distributed in India in the  sub-
Himalayan tracts upto 1,000 m as well as, in the lower ranges of the Eastern and Western  
Ghats and in the Andamans.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:N¡kuli, Candrik¡, Chandram¡rah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Chaandar 
English:Rauvolfia Root, Serpentina Root 
Gujrati  :Amelpodee 
Hindi    :Chhotaa Chaand, Dhavalbaruaa 
Kannada:Sutranaabhu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Amalpori 
Marathi:Adkai, Chandra  
Oriya   :Dhanbarua, Sanochado 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Sarppaganti 
Telugu  :Sarpagandhi 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Pieces of roots mostly about 8 to 15 cm long and 0.5 to 2 cm in thickness, sub-
cylindrical, curved, stout, thick and rarely branched; outer surface greyish-yellow to  
brown with irregular longitudinal fissures; rootlets 0.1mm in dia; fracture, short, slight  
odour and bitter taste.
b) Microscopic 
Root- Root comprises of stratified cork of about 18 layers, of which the cells of 8  
to 12 layers are smaller, suberized and unlignified; cells of remaining layers large,  
suberized and lignified; phelloderm parenchymatous, some cells packed with starch  
grains and prismatic and clusters crystals of calcium oxalate; secondary phloem tissue  
consists of sieve cells, companion cells and parenchymatous cell containing starch grains  
and crystals of calcium oxalate; phloem fibres absent; phloem parenchyma occasionally  
filled with granular substances; starch grains mostly simple but compound granules also  
occur with 2 to 4 components; individual granules spherical,  about 5 to 15  µm in 
194diameter, with well marked hilum simple or split in a radiate form;  stone cells are  
absent (distinction from many other species such as  R. canescens, R. micrantha, R.  
densiflora,  R.  perakensis  and  R.  vomitoria );  secondary  xylem  is  traversed  by  well  
developed lignified medullary rays of about 1 to 5 cell wide but uniseriate rays are more  
prominent; vessels singly or in pairs; xylem parenchyma cells lignified; fibres present;  
cells of medullary rays thick walled  also filled with starch grains and calcium oxalate  
prisms.
Powder - Coarse to fine, yellowish-brown, free flowing, odour slight, bitter in taste;  
characterized by spherical, simple to compound starch grains, calcium oxalate prisms  
and clusters; vessels with simple perforation, occasionally tailed; tracheids lignified;  
xylem fibres irregular in shape, occurs singly or in small groups, walls lignified, tips  
occasionally forked or truncated; wood parenchyma cells are filled with calcium oxalate  
crystals and starch grains; stone cells phloem fibres absent. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanol and Ammonia extract of root powder on silica gel 'G' plate  
using Toluene : Ethyl acetate : Diethylamine (70 : 20: 10) shows eight spot on spraying  
with Dragendorff reagent  at Rf. 0.11, 0.13, 0.25, 0.37, 0.47, 0.51, 0.61 and 0.82 (all  
reddish brown). The spot at Rf. 0.82 is of reserpine.
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   Rauwolfia  contains  indole  alkaloids,  such  as  reserpinine,  
serpentinine and ajmalicine.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pan¢,  Kaphahara,  M£tral,  P¡can¢,  Rucya,  V¡tahara,  ViÀaghna,  
Nidr¡prada, K¡m¡vas¡daka, H¤davas¡daka. 
 
195IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Sarpagandh¡di C£r¸a, Sarpagandh¡yoga, Sarpagandh¡  
Va¶i, Sarpagandh¡ Ghana Va¶¢ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  á£la, Anidr¡, Apasm¡ra, Bh£tab¡dh¡, Bhrama, Jvara, K¤miroga,  
Madaroga,  Unm¡da,  Yoni¿£la,  Raktav¢ta,  M¡nasaroga,  Vis
£cik¡, Vra¸a. 
DOSE  -  1-2 g.   
   
  
19677. Svetapunarnava(Rt) 
áVETAPUNARNAVË  (Root) 
ávetapunarnav¡  consists  of  root  of  Boerhaavia  verticillata  Poir.  (Fam. 
Nyctaginaceae), a herbaceous weed with a tendency to climb, widely distributed in the  
plains throughout India during rainy season.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:V¤sc¢va 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Shatapunyaa 
English:Horse purslene, Blunt leaved Hogweed 
Gujrati  :Vasedo, Vasedee 
Hindi    :Safed Punarnavaa, Gada Poornaa 
Kannada:Maachchugoni, Vinleey Duvelladkilu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Pundharighentuli 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Itsita 
Tamil   :Sharunnai, Mukkarattai-Kirai 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Roots occur in small pieces of 5 to 7.5 cm in length and upto 2 cm in thickness;  
texture rough; lenticels dot like or slightly transversely elongated, arranged in transverse  
rows; colour brown, freshly cut surface creamish to light brown; odour and taste not  
distinctive.
b) Microscopic 
Root shows anamolous secondary growth; periderm present and consisting of  
phellem, phellogen and phelloderm; part of phellem and phellogen sloughed off and  
phelloderm mostly crushed but forms a continuous layer around the stelar region; the  
phellogen consists of 4 or 5 layers of rectangular and tangentially elongated cells; cortex  
composed of parenchymatous cells that are usually crushed; raphides present in some  
cells of cortex; centre of the root occupied by xylem consisting mostly of vessels, fibres  
and tracheids; concentric but irregular rings of cambium, patches of xylem and phloem,  
and parenchyma alternate in turn towards the periphery; medullary rays are not distinct;  
starch abundant in parenchyma; most of the starch grains rounded or hemispherical in  
shape; the compound starch grains, however, are scanty. 
197Powder - The powder show raphides (usually broken) and fragments of fibres, and vessel  
members showing scalariform thickenings; starch present.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   16   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using toluene:ethylacetate:acetic acid (5:4.5:0.5), shows under U.V. (366nm) spots at Rf  
0.37, 0.59, 0.80 (All Blue). On spraying with anisaldehyde: sulphuric acid reagent and  
heating the plate for ten minutes at 110oC spots appear at Rf 0.19(Greyish Black), 0.59  
(Greyish Black), 0.69 (Blue), 0.79 (Purple).
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :Kaphahara, V¡tahara, ViÀaghna, Pitta¿¡maka, Agnid¢paka, Jvarahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Kum¡ry¡sava (A), Punarnav¡dyriÀ¶a, Dh¡nvantara Gh
¤ta, D¡dhika Gh¤ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  áopha, áotha, H¤droga, K¡sa, P¡¸·u, Pl¢h¡roga, S£la, SarpaviÀa,  
Udararoga,  V¤ÀcikaviÀa,  ViÀavik¡ra,  UrahkÀata,  Rakta  Vik¡ra,  
Paittika  Jvara,  C¡turthikajvara,  ár¡va,  V¡takan¶aka,  Vidradhi  
AlarkaviÀa, M£ÀakaviÀa 
DOSE  -  5-15 g.  
   
  
19878. Tailaparnah(Lf) 
TAILAPARÛAH (Leaf) 
Tailapar¸ah  consists  of  mature  leaf  of  Eucalyptus  globulus  Labill.  (Fam. 
Myrtaceae) a large tree attaining a height of 90 m or more, native to Australia, but planted  
world wide and introduced in Nilgiris, Anamalai and Palni hills, Simla and Shillong at an  
altitude of 1500-2500 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:N¢laniry¡sa, Ekalipth, Sugandha Patrah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:Blue gum, Eucalyptus 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Yukeliptas 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Yukkaalimaram 
Marathi:Nilgiri 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Yukkaalimaram 
Telugu  :Jeevakamu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Drug consists of mature leaves, more or less scimitar shaped, thick, leathery,  
greyish-green, petiolate, upto 26 cm long and 4 cm broad; petioles 2.0 to 3.5 cm long  
and 0.5 to 1.5 mm thick, sometimes twisted; apex acute to acuminate, base obtuse;  
midrib prominent, particularly on the lower surface; margin of leaf entire and somewhat  
thickened, brittle and possess numerous brown to dark brown corky warts. In transmitted  
light, numerous oil glands can be seen as transluscent dots; upper surface smooth, lower  
surface slightly rough due to the presence of projecting veins; venation - unicostate  
reticulate; lateral veins anastamose near the margin forming a continuous line; odour  
strong and characteristic.
b) Microscopic 
Leaf - T.S. shows typical isobilateral structures with two or three rows of palisade cells  
on both upper and lower sides, surfaces show thick cuticle; numerous sunken stomata  
199and large ovoid schizogenous oil cavities of 160 to 200 µ diam.; idioblasts present with  
rosettes  or  prismatic  calcium  oxalate  crystals;  rosette  crystals  25  to  35 µ in  size, 
prismatic crystals 15 to 25 µ in size; vascular bundle of midrib are crescent shaped with  
one vascular strand present on each side, all having interrupted patches of sclerenchyma;  
corky warts comprising of 10 or more layers of cells; laminary bundles enclosed in  
bundle sheath, the cells of which extend to the epidermis on both sides; upper and lower  
epidermal cells have straight walls; stomata anomocytic; stomatal index on both upper  
and lower surface 5 to 10; the palisade ratio on upper surface 5 to 17 and lower surface 3  
to 6.
  
Powder - Yellowish brown, free flowing, characterized by the presence of cluster and  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; epidermis straight walled with sunken stomata;  
fibers present.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   9    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     21   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Essential oil                              Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.10 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of hexane extract on silica gel 60 F 254 plate using Toluene : Acetone  
(95:05) shows four spots at Rf  0.22, 0.35, 0.41 and 0.49 on spraying with Vanillin-
Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for 15 minutes at 110oC.
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Essential oil containing terpenes such as  1,8 - cineole, camphene,  
sabinene, myrcene, p-menthone, α-and γ-terpinene, fenchone, α- β-
thujone, citral, verbenone.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pana,  H¤dya,  Kaphahara,  M£trala,  P¡cana,  V¡tahara,  
Durgandhin¡¿aka, Agnim¡ndya, Balaprada 
 
200IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -   Ek¡da¿a¿atikapras¡ni¸¢  Failam,  Mah¡sugandhika  
Taila,  Paµcavaktra  Rasa,  Paµcagu¸a  Taila,  
M¡rta¸dabhairava Rasa, Jvaram¡ri Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES   -  á£la,  Agnim¡ndya,  áv¡sa,  H¤droga,  Jvara,  K¤mi,  KÀaya,  P
£yameha,  Pl¢h¡roga,  Prati¿y¡ya,  Prav¡hik¡,  Svarabheda,  
ViÀamajvara, J¢r¸ak¡sa, Bastiroga 
DOSE  -  1-2 g.   
   
  
20179. Tinisha (Wd) 
TINIáAH (Wood)
Tini¿ah  consists  of  wood  of  Ougeinia  oojeinensis  (Roxb.)  Hochr.  syn.  O. 
dalbergioides Benth. (Fam. Fabaceae), a small to medium sized deciduous tree, found in  
the outer Himalayas and sub Himalayan tracts from Jammu to Bhutan up to an altitude of  
1500 m and extending through the whole of the northern and central India into greater part  
of Deccan Peninsula. 
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Tinih, Syandanah, Rathadru 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Tinish 
English:Sandan 
Gujrati  :Tanacha 
Hindi    :Sandan, Saanana, Tinisaa 
Kannada:Karimutale, Kalabangaa 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Totukara, Malavenna 
Marathi:Timas, Syandan  
Oriya   :Vanjan 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Narivengai, Naiponai 
Telugu  :Tellamotuku, Dargu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Wood pieces are roughly cubic and about 2 to 3 cm in size; outer part yellow or  
cream, internal part light to dark brown in colour; cut surfaces are fibrous, wood pieces  
devoid of any odour. 
b) Microscopic 
Sap wood - Diffuse porous, vessels in cross sections solitary, in short radial  
multiples  or  in  clusters, forming  oblique  chains,  about  30 to  220  µ in  diam. with 
reticulate thickenings and simple pits, without gummy deposits; frequency of vessels per  
sq. mm is 14 to 18; axial parenchyma is paratracheal, aliform, confluent - broad and  
filled with simple starch grains 4 to 21 µ in dia. with prominent striations and slit like  
centric hilum; fibres present in patches; marginal fibres possess abundant prismatic  
crystals of calcium oxalate, 4 to 10 µ in size; fibres are occasionally septate; rays uni- to  
202multiseriate, heterogenous, usually homocellular, some cells may contain minute starch  
grains of about 8 µ diam.; cells contain no tannin. 
Heart wood - T.S. shows vessels of same size as those of sap wood but are usually filled  
with brownish gummy material and possess bordered pits; frequency of vessels per sq.  
mm is 6 to 8; axial parenchyma is paratracheal, aliform and is usually filled with  
brownish substance but lack starch grains; marginal fibres contain abundant prismatic  
crystals of same size as observed in the sapwood, ray, axial parenchyma and fibres  
contain tannins.                    
                                                                                                                      
Powder - Brown, fibrous, free flowing, characterized by the presence of several lumps of  
brown gummy material, xylem parenchyma, medullary ray cells, simple starch grains,  
xylem vessels with several small slit like pits and fibres containing crystals of calcium  
oxalate.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   7    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of methanol extract on silica gel 'G' plate using diethyl ether : hexane  
(78:22) shows six spots at Rf  0.47, 0.50, 0.62, 0.65, 0.72 and 0.86 on spraying with  
Vanillin-Sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for 15 minutes at 110oC.
 
 CONSTITUENTS  -  Flavonoids mainly homoferreirin and ougeinin.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :KuÀthaghna, Medohara, Pittahara, Ras¡yana, ViÀaghna, Vra¸aropa¸a,  
Kapha¿oÀa¸a, áo¸itasth¡pana 
 
203IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Ayask¤ti 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   áotha,  ávitra,  D¡ha,  K¤mi,  KuÀ¶ha,  Medoroga,  Prameha,  
Prav¡hik¡,  Rakt¡tis¡ra,  Raktapitta,  Raktavik¡ra,  Vra¸a,  
Ati¿ara, P¡¸duroga 
DOSE  -  50 - 100 ml Kv¡tha. 
   
  
20480. Tintidika (AerialPart ) 
TINTIÚÌKAH (Aerial Part) 
Tinti·¢kah consists of mature dried aerial part of  Rhus parviflora Ro xb. (Fam. 
Anacardiaceae), an evergreen or sub-deciduous shrub commonly found on the dry hot  
slopes of Himalayas from Punjab to Nepal and in the hills of Peninsular India at an altitude  
of 600-2100 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Tinti·¢ka 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:Sumac 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Tungalaa, Samakadana, Raitung 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:-- 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Khatte Masoor, Raitung, Tungaa 
Tamil   :-- 
Telugu  :Jeevakamu 
Urdu    :Sumaak 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Stem - Young stem branched, reddish-brown, tomentose; stem pieces 10 to 15 cm long  
and upto 4 cm in diam., old ones woody with longitudinal striations and glandular  
protuberances, greenish-brown, bark separable from wood, inner surface of bark reddish-
brown, wood light brown in colour; fracture, hard and fibrous. 
Leaf - Trifoliate when intact, leaflets elliptic, oblong, obovate, petiolate, petiole 2.5 to  
3.5 cm in length, tomentose, terminal leaflet large, obovate, 7 to 8.5 cm in length, 3 or 4  
cm broad, rather thick, basal margin entire and cuneate, upper coarsely and irregularly  
crenate,  pubescent,  laterals  relatively  broader  and  more  rounded  at  base,  sessile,  
pubescent and smooth.
Fruit - Drupe, oval, yellowish-green to brownish-green, glabrous, shining, fruits present  
on panicles; calyx persistent; fruit wrinkled.
205b) Microscopic 
Stem - T.S. shows cork, cortex and stele; patches of cortical fibres, secretory canals and  
rhomboid crystals of calcium oxalate, measuring about 13  µ well distributed in the  
cortex;  xylem  in  the  form  of  a  continuous  cylinder  traversed  by  uni  or  biseriate  
medullary rays; border pitted and scalariform vessels present; lignified fibres septate,  
measuring  300  to  770  µ in  length  and  upto  50  µ in  width;  pith  parenchymatous,  
possessing tannins, starch grains and rhomboid crystals of calcium oxalate. 
Petiole  -  T.S.  shows  a  single  layered  epidermis  covered  with  cuticle;  abundant  
unicellular and multicellular, uniseriate trichomes measuring 30 to 360 µ in length and 
10 to 20 µ in width; cortex consisting of 3 or 4 layers of collenchymatous cells and 5 or  
6 layers of parenchymatous cells, some cells of collenchyma and parenchyma contain  
rhomboidal crystals of calcium oxalate, measuring upto 20 µ; collateral vascular bundles  
15 to 17 in number, surrounding a central parenchymatous pith and capped by an arch of  
pericyclic fibres; secretory canals present in phloem region.
Midrib  -  T.S.  shows  single  layered  epidermis,  covered  with  cuticle;  nonglandular,  
unicellular and uniseriate, multicellular trichomes abundantly present on the epidermis,  
followed by collenchymatous tissue; vascular bundles 5 to 7 in number, arranged in a  
circle, conjoint, collateral, each capped by an arch of fibres; secretory canals present in  
phloem region; pith consists of parenchymatous cells .  
Lamina -  T.S. shows dorsiventral structure, epidermal cells composed of cubical to  
slightly elongated and rectangular cells, externally covered with cuticle; below upper  
epidermis 2 or 3 layers of palisade parenchyma present; lower epidermis single layered  
with thick cuticle; unicellular and uniseriate, multicellular trichomes present on both  
surfaces, measuring upto 200 µ in length and about 30 µ in width; palisade parenchyma  
followed by loosely arranged spongy parenchyma cells; mesophyll traversed by vascular  
bundles;  each  vascular  bundle  surrounded  by  bundle  sheath,  extending  from  upper  
epidermis  to  lower  epidermis  as  bundle  sheath  extension.  In  surface  view  lower  
epidermis  shows  anomocytic  type  of  stomata  while  upper  epidermis  is  devoid  of  
stomata; stomatal index 6 to 10 on lower epidermis; vein islet number 12 to 15; palisade  
ratio 2 to 4.
 
Powder - Brown, odour slightly strong, somewhat acrid in taste; fragments of palisade  
tissue, calcium oxalate crystals, trichomes, starch grains, bordered pitted vessels and  
vessels having scalariform thickenings. 
206IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   0.7  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     10   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of  the  alcoholic  extract on  silica gel  'G'  plate  (0.2  mm  thick)  using  
chloroform : methanol: acetic acid (80:20:2) shows under UV (254 nm) six spots at Rf.  
0.11, 0.18, 0.29, 0.54 (all brown), 0.80 and 0.91 (both yellowish green). Under UV  
(366nm) seven fluorescent spots appear at Rf. 0.11, 0.18, 0.29, 0.54, 0.70 (all brown),  
0.80 and 0.91 (both pink). On exposure to iodine vapour eight spots appear at Rf.  
0.11(pinkish brown), 0.15, 0.22 (brown), 0.38, 0.64, 0.74, 0.80 and 0.91 (all yellowish  
brown). On spraying with 5% ferric chloride solution seven spots appear at Rf. 0.15,  
0.24 (both green), 0.41 (faint brown), 0.54 (blue), 0.73 (faint brown) 0.83 and 0.91 (both  
brown).
  
CONSTITUENTS   -  Tannins (Gallic acid); flavones (myricetin, quercetin, myricitrin,  
quercitrin,  kampferol);  glycosides  (isorhmnetin-3- α-L-
arabinoside)
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Amla 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Amla 
Karma   :D¢pana,  Gr¡h¢,  Jvaraghna,  Kaphav¡tahara,  Pittakara,  Rocana,  
V¡tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS   -  Yav¡ni â¡·ava, Hinguvac¡di C£r¸a, Sr¢ R¡mab¡¸a  
Rasa 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Agnim¡ndya, Aruci, Atis¡ra, Prav¡hik¡, T¤À¸¡, V¡tavik¡ra 
DOSE  -  3 - 6 g. 
   
  
20781. Trapusha (Sd) 
TRAPUâAê (Seed) 
TrapuÀaÆ consists of dried seed of Cucumis sativus Linn. (Fam. Cucurbitaceae), an  
annual trailing or climbing plant, numerous varieties widely cultivated throughout India  
upto an altitude of 1200 m. The seeds are devoid of mucilagenous outer layer.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:ávetakaraha¶akaÆ, Sudh¡v¡sah, MutralaÆ, Kan¶akiphalam 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Ksheeraa, Shashaa 
English:Cucumber 
Gujrati  :Taanslee 
Hindi    :Kheeraa 
Kannada:Mullusavte, Santekaayi 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Vellari 
Marathi:Tause, Khiraa 
Oriya   :Kantiaali Kaakudi 
Punjabi:Khiraa 
Tamil   :Vellarikkaay, Pippinkaay 
Telugu  :Khirakaya 
Urdu    :Kheeraa 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Seeds  compressed,  elongated,  ellipsoid,  dorsiventrally  convex  and  laterally  
ridged; size variable, about a cm or occasionally more in length and upto 0.5 cm wide;  
micropyle pointed, distinctly visible; outer surface glossy, brittle, peelable; yellowish-
white; kernel, oily, creamish-white; taste, mildly sweet, oily; not slippery to touch when  
moistened: odour, nil.
b) Microscopic 
Outermost layer of testa absent; hypodermis sclerenchymatous, two layered, outer  
layer of small, circular, stone cells, inner layer of large, oval, thick walled, striated,  
lignified sclereids placed at right angle to outer layer; a large zone of aerenchyma filled  
with  loosely  packed  parenchymatous  cells;  cotyledon  lined  by  compact  layer  of  
cuticularized thin walled epidermis, cotyledon of several layers of elongated, closely  
packed parenchymatous cells, largely hexagonal, packed with aleurone grains, starch and  
fat globules; innermost two layers much more elongated, palisade like, and distinct; each  
208cotyledon shows five distinct patches of small, thin walled, polygonal cells present  
midway, in a roughly trapezial shape.
Powder - Creamish-white to light-green, oily, shows groups of yellowish, wavy-walled  
sclereids from testa in surface view, also isolated ones; fragments of parenchymatous  
cells; annular or spiral xylem vessels in groups; abundant oil globules, aleurone grains,  
and starch grains.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     7    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using chloroform : methanol (20:0.5) shows spots at Rf 0.31 (purple), 0.40 (brown), 0.48  
(purple), 0.52 (light purple), 0.60 (purple), 0.70 (light grey) and 0.78 (pinkish brown) on  
spraying with vanillin-sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105oC for about ten 
minutes.
 
CONSTITUENTS  -  Fixed oil and sugars.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :Balya,  Kaphakara,  M£trala,  V¡tapittahara,  AbhiÀyand¢,  M
£trabastivi¿odhaka, Agnis¡dana 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -   Chardi,  M£trak¤cchra,  Raktavik¡ra,  M£tragh¡ta,  
Raktapitta, Daurbalya, D¡ha, Anidr¡, áirah¿£la, á
¢tajvara 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  á¢tajvara, Anidr¡, Chardi, D¡ha, Daurbalya, M£tragh¡ta, M£trak
¤cchra, Raktapitta, Raktavik¡ra, áirah¿£la 
DOSE  -  3-6 g powder. 
20982. Tuni (St.Bk) 
TÍNÌ (Stem Bark) 
T£n¢ consists of stem bark of  Cedrela toona  Roxb. (Fam. Meliaceae), a large,  
rapidly growing, nearly evergreen tree attaining a height upto 18 m, and distributed in  
tropical Himalayas from the Indus eastward, ascending to 1000 m and also throughout the  
hills of Central and Southern India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Nand¢v¤kÀa, Tuni, T£na, Nand¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Toongaachha 
English:Toon, Red ceder 
Gujrati  :Toonee 
Hindi    :Tun, Toonee, Tuni 
Kannada:Mandurike, Kempu Gandagheri 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Madagirivempu, Ikana, Patukarana 
Marathi:Toonee, Kurak 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Karamusuli, Shevagil Malavembu 
Telugu  :Nandichettu, Galimanu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark available in long pieces, channelled, of varying thickness; external surface,  
rough and rugged due to exfoliation and vertical cracks, fissured, dark grey having  
lenticels, inner surface, red, laminated and fibrous; fracture, fibrous and splintery; odour,  
very mild and pleasant; taste, sharp and acrid.
b) Microscopic 
Stem  bark  shows  exfoliating  cork,  8  to  10  layers  consisting  of  tangentially  
elongated, radially arranged, thin-walled cells; cortex, 12 to 15 layers of rectangular  
parenchymatous cells, outer layers having cells filled with small rosette crystals of  
calcium oxalate at regular intervals; inner layers of cortex of isodiametric cells having  
abundant larger rosette crystals; occasionally stone cells may be present in outer cortex;  
phloem  fibres  abundant  in  patches,  thick  walled;  medullary  rays  narrow,  generally  
biseriate; starch grains, simple or compound, present in cortical region.  
210Powder - Light reddish-brown; shows occasional fragments of cork cells; fibres, large,  
abundant in groups, a few isolated, lignified with distinct lumen, tips bluntly pointed or  
having  distinct  indentation;  stone  cells,  few,  of  varying  shapes,  elongated  to  
isodiametric; phloem parenchyma, thin-walled, containing calcium oxalate rosettes and  
prisms; abundant prismatic and rosette calcium oxalate crystals, rosettes of varying sizes  
measuring 11 to 60 µ, prisms, small; starch grains, simple or compound having 2 to 6  
components, 3-component grains most common, round and oval measuring upto 10 µ in 
dia., cleft hilum.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   14   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     9    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using petroleum ether : hexane : ethyl acetate : formic acid (10:30:15:1) shows spots at  
Rf. 0.34, 0.44, 0.57 and 0.88 (all purple) on spraying with vanillin-sulphuric acid reagent  
and heating the plate at 105oC for about ten minutes.
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Triterpenoids.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Gr¡h¢, Kaphahara, Medohara, Pittahara, Bhagnasandh¡naka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Nyagrodh¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   D¡ha,  Ga¸·am¡l¡,  Ka¸·u,  KuÀ¶ha,  Prameha,  Raktapitta,  
Raktavik¡ra, ViÀavik¡ra, Vra¸a, Yoniroga, B¡la Prav¡hik¡,  
ávetakuÀ¶ha, Medovik¡ra 
DOSE  -  3-6 g kv¡tha-10-20 ml. 
   
  
21183. Vanda(Lf) 
VANDË (Leaf) 
Vand¡ consists of the dried leaf of Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn. f.) Ettingsh. syn.  
Loranthus falcatus Linn . f. (Fam. Loranthaceae), an epiphyte, mostly on fruit trees, and  
distributed throughout India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:V¤kÀ¡dan¢, Band¡ka, V¤kÀaruh¡, SaÆharÀ¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Maandaa 
English:Mistletoe 
Gujrati  :Baando 
Hindi    :Bandaa 
Kannada:Bandanike, Bandhulu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Ittikkanni, Itil 
Marathi:Baandagul, Banda 
Oriya   :Vrudhongo 
Punjabi:Pulluri 
Tamil   :Baadanikaa, Jiddu  
Telugu  :Jeevakamu 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Leaves petiolate, exstipulate, opposite, decussate, simple, ovate to oblanceolate,  
glabrous, soft and leathery when young, brittle when dry; margin entire; base decurrent;  
apex acute; slightly astringent; odour resembling those of tealeaves.
b) Microscopic 
Transverse section of the leaf shows a thick cuticle, upper and lower epidermis  
composed of squarish cells with convex periclinal outer walls; surface views of upper  
and lower nearly similar; stomata paracytic, present on both surfaces; mesophyll of  
lamina consisting of 2 to 4 layers inner to upper and lower epidermis made up of  
compactly arranged short rectangular cells and irregularly arranged parenchyma cells of  
middle layers but possesing a few intercellular spaces; occassional vascular strands  
passing  through  this  middle portion; isolated sclereids  about  50  µ thick  containing  
prismatic crystals of about 12 µ present in parenchyma; midrib buldging prominently on  
both the surfaces and containing a group of 3 to 5 vascular bundles; xylem of vascular  
bundles  oriented  towards  upper  epidermis  and  consisting  of  tracheids,  vessels  and  
parenchyma; phloem present towards lower epidermis and consisting of thin walled  
212cells;  bundle  sheath  absent;  each  vascular  bundle  associated  with  patch  of  
collenchymatous cells outside the phloem; tannin (ranging from yellow to brown in  
colour) abundant in parenchyma cells of midrib and lamina region, especially in the 2 or  
3 subepidermal layers; stomatal index 9 to 13 on upper surface and 10 to 14 on lower  
surface.
Powder  -  The  powder  shows  angular  epidermal  cells  and  groups  of  thin  walled,  
rectangular, closely packed parenchyma cells many of which contain tannins.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   14   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcohol soluble extract on Silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick) using  
toluene : ethyl formate : formic acid (5:4:1) as mobile phase shows under U.V. (366 nm)  
spots  at Rf. 0.06 (Brown); 0.39(Blue); 0.46 (Blue); 0.55 (Red); 0.81 (Pink). On spraying  
with anisaldehyde: sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate for ten minutes at 110o C 
two spots appear at Rf 0.35(Light Green), 0.45 (Orange).
  
CONSTITUENTS   -  Leaves contain flavonoids such as Quercetin, quercetrin;Tannins  
comprising of gallic and chebulinic acid.
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :áukrajanana,  Gr¡h¢,  Kaphahara,  M£travirecan¢ya,  Pittahara,  
RakÀoghna,  Ras¡yana,  V¡tahara,  V¤Àya,  Vra¸aropa¸a,  áramahara,  
Netrya, Grahan¡¿ana, Ma¸galakara, Garbhasth¡pana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  (No formulations) 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   Bhagandara,  Hikk¡,  M£traroga,  Raktapitta,  ViÀamajvara,  
ViÀaroga, Vra¸a, Vandhyatva, V¡t¡-ámar¢ 
DOSE  -  10 - 20 ml juice. 
21384. Vanda(St) 
VANDË (Stem) 
Vand¡ consists of the dried stem of Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn. f.) Ettingsh. syn.  
Loranthus falcatus Linn. f. (Fam. Loranthaceae), an epiphyte, mostly on fruit trees, and  
distributed throughout India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Band¡ka, SaÆharÀ¡, V¤kÀ¡dan¢, V¤kÀaruh¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Maandaa 
English:Mistletoe 
Gujrati  :Baando 
Hindi    :Bandaa 
Kannada:Bandhulu, Badanike 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Itil, Ittikkanni 
Marathi:Baandagul, Banda 
Oriya   :Vrudhongo 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Pulluri 
Telugu  :Baadanikaa, Jiddu  
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Small twigs of aerial branches ranging from 2 mm to 2.5 cm in thickness; the  
bark of stem thin, dark brown and specked with lighter brown, uniformly distributed  
lenticles; the wood reddish-brown after removal of thin bark; stem slightly rough to  
touch; fracture irregular; fractured surface dark brown; no distinct taste or odour.
b) Microscopic 
A transverse section of stem reveals a circular outline with a thick cuticle, and  
epidermis made up of squarish or barrel shaped cells with convex outer periclinal walls  
and interrupted here and there by lenticular openings; cork made up of thin-walled,  
crushed rectangular cells; cortex consisting of many layers of tangentially elongated and  
rounded cells interspersed with sclereids upto 85 µ in size and in groups of 2 to 4; many  
cells of cortex, especially those of outer few layers contain tannins ranging in colour  
from yellow, orange to dark brown; groups of pericyclic fibres form a ring outside  
phloem; cambium present; xylem surrounding the central pith and composed of well  
developed vessels, fibre and parenchyma, 1 to 4 seriate medullary rays composed of  
214radially elongated  cells  present; pith consists  of  thin  walled, rounded  or  polygonal  
parenchymatous cells; small groups of sclereids, up to 85 µ each in size present in both  
pith and medullary rays; prismatic crystals present in association with sclereids and  
medullary ray cells.
Powder  -  Powder  shows  vessel  elements  with  simple pitted  thickenings,  groups  of  
sclereids containing prismatic crystals (size of crystal 30 to 35 µ long and 15 to 17 µ 
wide) and fragments of parenchyma cells containing tannins.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     3    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcohol soluble extract of the drug in chloroform as a mobile phase  
shows  under  UV  (366  nm)  spots  Rf  0.13  (Grey);  0.24  (Green);  0.35  (Blue);  0.56  
(Yellow); 0.76 (Grey); 0.85 (Orange Pink); 0.96 (Pink).
  
CONSTITUENTS   -  Young shoots contain nearly 10 per cent tannins and the stem  
contains  β-amyrin-0-acetate,  oleonolic  acid  its  methyl  ester  acetate, β-sitosterol  and 
stigmasterol.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :áramahara,  áukrajanana,  Garbhasth¡pana,  Gr¡h¢,  Grahan¡¿ana,  
Kaphahara,  M£travirecan¢ya,  Ma¸galakara,  Netrya,  Pittahara,  
RakÀoghna, Ras¡yana, V¡tahara, V¤Àya, Vra¸aropa¸a 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  (No formulations) 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   Bhagandara,  Hikk¡,  M£traroga,  Raktapitta,  V¡t¡-ámar¢,  
Vandhyatva, ViÀamajvara, ViÀaroga, Vra¸a 
DOSE  -  10 - 20 ml juice. 
21585. Vanda(Aerial Rt.) 
VANDË (Aerial Root) 
Vand¡ consists of the dried aerial root of Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn. f.) Ettingsh.  
syn. Loranthus falcatus Linn . f. (Fam. Loranthaceae), an epiphyte, mostly on fruit trees,  
and distributed throughout India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Band¡ka, SaÆharÀ¡, V¤kÀ¡dan¢, V¤kÀaruh¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Maandaa 
English:Mistletoe 
Gujrati  :Baando 
Hindi    :Bandaa 
Kannada:Badanike, Bandhulu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Itil, Ittikkanni 
Marathi:Baandagul, Banda 
Oriya   :Vrudhongo 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Pulluri 
Telugu  :Baadanikaa, Jiddu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Adventitious  root greyish brown  outside, yellowish  to brown inside, slender,  
contorted and knotty in appearance, sending out haustoria into the host plant or, also into  
its own branches; rarely branched; fracture, irregular; odour and taste not distinct.
b) Microscopic 
A  transverse  section  of  adventitious  root  is  circular  in  outline;  cuticle  and  
epidermis sloughed off; outermost zone consists of broken tissue of cork and cortex  
followed by cork cambium made of rectangular cells; cortex wide, many layered, made  
of thin walled rounded cells and selereids upto 50 µ size, present singly or in groups of 2  
to 4; many cells of cortex contain tannin; patches of pericyclic fibres surround the  
vascular ring; phloem composed of small thin walled cells present outside the xylem and  
separated from it by the vascular cambium; xylem interrupted by short, 1 or 2 seriate  
medullary  rays  composed  of  radially  elongated  cells;  xylem  composed  of  scattered  
vessels, parenchyma and fibres; pith wide, composed of rounded parenchymatous cells  
interspersed with thick walled fibres of about 5 µ in dia.
216Powder - Powder shows tracheids and vessel members with simple pitted thickenings,  
broken fibres; stone cells with faint incomplete radial striations, upto 50 µ in size and 
containing prismatic crystals.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   6    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     12   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     1    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcohol soluble extract of the drug on silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm  
thick) using chloroform : methanol (80:20) as mobile phase shows under U.V. (at 366  
nm) spots at Rf 0.35 (Blue); 0.58 (Blue); 0.90 (Blue).
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Catechin and leucocynidin in the bark.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :áramahara,  áukrajanana,  Garbhasth¡pana,  Gr¡h¢,  Grahan¡¿ana,  
Kaphahara,  M£travirecan¢ya,  Ma¸galakara,  Netrya,  Pittahara,  
Ras¡yana, V¡tahara, V¤Àya, Vra¸aropa¸a 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  M£travirecan¢ya K¡À¡ya C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   Bhagandara,  Hikk¡,  M£traroga,  Raktapitta,  V¡t¡-ámar¢,  
Vandhyatva, ViÀamajvara, ViÀaroga, Vra¸a 
DOSE  -  10 - 20 ml juice. 
   
  
21786. Vanda(Fl) 
VANDË (Flower) 
Vand¡  consists  of  flowers  of  Dendrophthoe  falcata  (Linn.f.)  Ettingsh.  syn.  
Loranthus falcatus Linn . f. (Fam. Loranthaceae), a semi-parasite, mainly on fruit trees, and  
distributed throughout India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Band¡ka, SaÆharÀ¡, V¤kÀ¡dan¢, V¤kÀaruh¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Maandaa 
English:Mistletoe 
Gujrati  :Baando 
Hindi    :Bandaa 
Kannada:Badanike, Bandhulu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Itil, Ittikanni 
Marathi:Baandagul, Banda 
Oriya   :Vrudhongo 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Pulluri 
Telugu  :Baadanikaa, Jiddu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Flowers actinomorphic, bisexual, regular, complete, coloured, apetalous, epigy-
nous with cup or disc shaped receptacle, pentamerous; perianth-tepals 5, free and strap  
shaped towards the distal end and in the form of a sickle-shaped tube towards the basal  
end; surrounded at the base by a cup-shaped calyx; the perianth tube measures about 40  
to 55 mm in length; it is narrow at the base and gradually widens towards the upper part;  
the perianth lobes become strongly reflexed at maturity. Inside the perianth tube are 5  
cushion shaped nectarines; androecium stamens 5, epiphyllous, starting from two-thirds  
of length of perianth tube and continuing to the tip of perianth lobes, appressed to the  
style in young flowers; filaments orange coloured; anthers monothecous, dark, basifixed;  
gynoecium  ovary  1,  inferior,  obscurely  unilocular;  style  long,  filamentous;  stigma  
capitate; placentation basal, one ovule in each locule.
 
218b) Microscopic 
Powder -  The powder shows characteristically triradiate, smooth walled, pollen  
grains upto 45 µ in size and having a depression in the centre at distal end of each arm,  
and endothelial tissue. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on Silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick) using toluene  
: ethylformate : formic acid (5:4:1) as mobile phase shows under U.V. (at 366 nm)  
spots at Rf value 0.11, 0.16, 0.26 (Blue), 0.45 (Pink). On spraying with anisaldehyde :  
sulphuric acid reagent and on heating the plate for ten minutes at 110oC  spots at Rf. 
0.07  (Black);  0.12  (Green  Black);  0.22  (Blue);  0.31  (Yellow);  0.40  (Yellow);  0.88  
(Green) appear.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :RakÀoghna,  áramahara,  áukrajanana,  Garbhasth¡pana,  Gr¡h¢,  
Grahan¡¿ana,  Kaphahara,  M£travirecan¢ya,  Netrya,  Pittahara,  
Ras¡yana, V¡tahara, V¤Àya, Vra¸aropa¸a 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  (No formulations) 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   Bhagandara,  Hikk¡,  M£traroga,  Raktapitta,  V¡t¡-ámar¢,  
Vandhyatva, ViÀamajvara, ViÀaroga, Vra¸a 
DOSE  -  10 - 20 ml juice 
   
  
21987. VandaFr.) 
VANDË (Fruit) 
Vand¡ consists of the dried fruit of Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn. f.) Ettingsh. syn.  
Loranthus falcatus Linn . f. (Fam. Loranthaceae), an epiphyte, mostly on fruit trees, and  
distributed throughout India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Band¡ka, SaÆharÀ¡, V¤kÀ¡dan¢, V¤kÀaruh¡ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Maandaa 
English:Mistletoe 
Gujrati  :Baando 
Hindi    :Bandaa 
Kannada:- 
Kashmiri:Ittikkanni, Itil 
Malayalam:Baandagul, Banda 
Marathi:Vrudhongo 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Pulluri 
Tamil   :Baadanikaa, Jiddu  
Telugu  :Jeevakamu 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
The fruit is an ovate pseudo berry, upto 3 mm in thickness and 3 to 8 mm in  
length; greenish-yellow when mature and turning brown when dry; the top of the fruit is  
crowned by a persistent calyculus; the fruit contains an elongated, flask-shaped seed  
upto 5 mm long and 2 mm thick, rugose, brown, hard, and enclosed in a shiny, viscid  
film.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. of the pseudoberry shows the outer tissues of thalamus separated by a zone  
of viscid mass from the inner tissues of the seed. Fruit tissue consist of an outer epicarp  
formed  of  a  single  layer  of  epidermis  composed  of  squarish  or  rounded,  thickly  
cuticularized cells followed by 3 or 4 layers of thick walled, larged sized, squarish cells  
containing tannins; mesocarp consist of multiple layers of small relatively clear cells  
with interspersed groups of stone cells. Fruit wall delimited inside by multiple layers of  
large,  rounded,  thin  walled  parenchymatous  cells  containing  yellow  to  dark  brown  
tannins; the seed consists of an outer viscid zone delimited towards inside by a ring of  
220tissues made of several layers of isodiametric cells mostly containing brown pigment in  
outer 2 or 3 layers and a ring of vascular bundles. Inner to this is a zone comprising of  
radially  elongated,  compactly  arranged  thin-walled  cells  rich  in  starch  towords  the  
center; centre of the seed occupied by a mass of uniform, isodiametric, parenchymatous  
embryonic cells.
Powder -  Cellular debris and stone cells with circular striations 20 to 35  µ are seen, 
groups of cells containing tannins also present.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     17   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     5    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of  the  alcoholic  extract on  silica gel  'G'  plate  (0.2  mm  thick)  using  
toluene: ethylacetate: acetic acid (5:4.5:0.5), shows under U.V. (366nm) spots at Rf. 0.23  
(Greyish  Black),  0.57,  0.72  (Pink),  0.81  (Blue),  0.89  (Pink).  On  spraying  with  
anisaldehyde- sulphuric acid reagent and on heating the plate for ten minutes at 110 ° C 
spots appear at Rf. 0.22, 0.37 (Blue), 0.52 (Purple), 0.57 (Greyish Black), 0.67, 0.72  
(Dark Blue), 0.75 (Purple).
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Gr¡h¢, Kaphahara, Pittahara, Ras¡yana, V¡tahara, V¤Àya, ViÀaghna,  
Vra¸aropa¸a, RakÀoghna áramahara, Grahan¡¿ana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  (No formulations) 
 
THERAPEUTIC  USES   -   A¿mar¢,  Ar¿a,  Ka¸¶haroga,  M£tragh¡ta,  M£trak¤cchra,  M
£traruj¡,  Netraroga,  Raktapitta,  Sl¢pada,  V¡tarakta,  
V¡tavik¡ra, Vrana, M£tra¿arkar¡, Garbhasr¡va, Sopharoga,  
Ëm¡tis¡ra, ViÀamjvara 
DOSE  -  10 - 20 ml. 
22188. Vanyajiraka(Fr) 
VANYAJÌRAKA (Fruit) 
Vanyaj¢raka consists of dried fruit of  Centratherum anthelminticum  (L.) Kuntze 
(Fam. Asteraceae), an annual, robust, erect herb, found throughout India upto 1850 m in  
Himalaya and Khasi hills and often cultivated.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Ëra¸yaj¢rakah, B¤hatp¡l¢, Somar¡j¢, Vanaj¢rakah 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Somaraaj 
English:Purple Flebane, Worm Seed Fleabane 
Gujrati  :Kaaleejeeree, Kadavijeeree 
Hindi    :Kaalijeeree, Karajiri, Soharaai 
Kannada:Kaadujeerage, Kaarijirige 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Krimishatru, Kattujirakam 
Marathi:Kadujire 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Kaattuchirakam, Chittilai 
Telugu  :Adavijilakaroa, Garetikamma 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
The fruits are cypsela, indehiscent, 3 to 5 mm long and 1 to 2 mm in diameter;  
tapering towards base, pappus present over flattened upper end; surface exhibits about  
20 longitudinal ridges, hairy, blackish-brown to black in colour; taste, bitter and odour  
indistinct.
b) Microscopic 
T.S. of fruit exhibits about 20 ridges and furrows; the epidermis is single layered,  
covered  externally  with  thick  cuticle;  trichomes  are  of  two  types  -  covering  and  
glandular; covering trichomes unicellular, elongated with tapering ends, present mostly  
on the ridges; glandular hairs, sessile with unicellular heads are seen in the furrows; rest  
of  the  pericarp  consists  of  thin  walled  parenchymatous  cells;  vascular  bundles  are  
present below the ridges, followed by discontinuous and laterally extending arches of  
thick walled and lignified sclerenchymatous tissues; testa is single layered followed by  
thin walled parenchymatous cells of the cotyledon, most of them consisting of aleurone  
grains and a few exhibit oil globules.
222Powder - The powder exhibits fragments of fibres, fibre sclereids, scalariform vascular  
elements,  thin  walled  parenchymatous  cells  with  aleurone  grains  and  oil  globules,  
covering as well as glandular trichomes thin walled radially elongated cells of pappus.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2.0  per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   7.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   4.5  per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     20   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of petroleum ether extract on Silica Gel G 60 precoated plate (Merck)  
using Petroleum ether (60-80 °C); Diethyl ether: Acetic acid (70:32:2), shows under UV  
(366 nm) one spot at Rf. 0.48 (light blue); on exposure to iodine vapours 4 spots appear  
at Rf. 0.48 (dark orange), 0.57, 0.68 and 0.84 (all faint orange); after spraying with 5%  
ethanolic sulphuric acid and heating the plate at 110oC for 30 minutes, 4 spots appear at  
Rf. 0.48 (black) 0.57, 0.68 and 0.84 (all faint brown).
 
CONSTITUENTS   -  Sterols, avenasterol and vernosterol, a bitter principle, essential  
oil,resins and fixed oil consisting of myristic, palmitic, stearic,  
oleic, linoleic and vernolic acids
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, ÙikÀ¸a 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :D¢pana,  Kaphahara,  M£trala,  Stambhana,  V¡tahara,  Jantun¡¿aka,  
Netrya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Madhusnuh¢ Ras¡yana 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  á£la, áopha, áv¡sa, Gulma, Hikk¡, Jvara, K¡sa, K¤mi, KuÀ¶ha, M
£tragh¡ta, Raktavik¡ra, Vra¸a, Ka¸·£, SvitrakuÀ¶ha 
DOSE  -  1-3 g.  
   
  
22389. Vidarikanda (Tuber) 
VIDËRÌKANDA (Tuber) 
Vid¡r¢kanda is the dried tuber of Pueraria tuberosa DC. (Fam. Fabaceae), a large,  
perennial climber with tuberous roots, upto 60 cm long and 30 cm thick, even weighing  
upto 35 kg, from about 5 or 10 kg; they are distributed nearly throughout India.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:IkÀugandh¡, Vid¡r¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Shimiya, Shimiabatraji, Bhui Kumdo 
English:Indian Kudju 
Gujrati  :Khakharvel, Vidaree, Vidareekand 
Hindi    :VidareeKand, Bilaikand, Sural, Patal Kand 
Kannada:-- 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Bendriya bel, Bindree, Vendrichavel 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Siali 
Tamil   :Nilpushni Kezhugu 
Telugu  :Nelagummudu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Dried cut pieces of tuber, 3 to 5 cm large, 2 to 4 cm broad and fibrous; outer  
surface where present, light brown in colour; outer surface, where epidermis is present,  
is light brown with transverse warts and ridges; cut surface creamy; fleshy, transverse  
small warts and ridges are found on the surface, texture smooth; sweet in taste, no  
particular smell (cut pieces of the tubers of Ipomoea digitata, substitute of P. tuberosa, 
are cubical, smooth, light cream in colour and can easily be distinguished).   
b) Microscopic 
T.S. of whole root tuber is slightly wavy in outline, epidermis not discernible; 3  
to 4 layers of cork cells, followed by 5 to7 layers of parenchymatous cells present; cork  
cambium-brown in colour and 2 or 3 cells thick, endodermis well developed; pericycle  
fibrous followed by 2 layers of stone cells filled with sandy crystals; phloem consist of  
sieve tubes, companion cells, patches of bast fibres and phloem parenchyma; xylem  
pentarch in young root, consist of vessels with scalariform cross perforation, tracheids,  
xylem fibres and parenchyma; medullary rays broad and parenchymatous. The medullary  
224rays and phloem cells are filled with starch grains which are polygonal, 2 to 5 µm in 
diameter, simple or two to many-compound, hilum usually indistinct, occasionally a  
central  cleft,  lamellae  indistinct.  In  macerated  preparation  crystal  fibres  are  
multicellular, articulated, each cell carrying a crystal of calcium oxalate, some of the  
articulated fibres are swollen in the middle like a bulb pipette.
Powder -  Greyish-brown, no characteristic odour, bitter in taste; shows parenchyma  
filled with starch, septate fibres in the form of crystals fibres as well as shaped bulb like  
pipette; vessels with simple and scalariform cross perforation plates, stone cells, and  
starch as described under microscopy; powder treated with 1N NaOH in methanol and  
nitro-cellulose in amylacetate gives light green fluorescence under UV 254 nm.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Moisture content                        Not more than   10   per cent, Appendix      2.2.9. 
Total ash                                  Not more than   11   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid insoluble ash                      Not less than     1    per cent, Appendix    2.2.4. 
Alcohol soluble extractive         Not less than     13   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     22   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Starch                                     Not less than     14   per cent, Appendix    2.2.13 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using toluene : ethyl acetate : methanol (80 : 20 : 0.5) shows under UV (366 nm) blue  
fluorescent zones at Rf. 0.19, 0.25, 0.34, 0.38. On spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric  
acid reagent and heating for ten minutes at 120oC, spots appear at Rf. 0.19 (green), 0.34  
(Magenta), 0.45 (green), 0.48 (blue), 0.62 (blue), 0.67 (red) and 0.92 (dark pink).
  
CONSTITUENTS   -   Pterocarpan-tuberosin,  pterocarpanone-hydroxytuberosone,  two  
pterocarpenes-anhydrotuberosin  and  3-O-methylanhydro-
tuberosin, and a coumestan tuberostan. An isoflavone-puerarone  
and a coumestan-puerarostan.
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :á¢ta 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :Balya,  H¤dya,  J¢van¢ya,  M£tral,  Pittahara,  Svarya,  V¡j¢kara¸a,  
V¡tahara, V¤Àya, Var¸ya, B¤ha¸a, Stanyadu, Ras¡yan¢ 
225 IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS   -   áat¡vary¡di  Gh¤ta,  Mah¡viÀagarbha  Taila,  
Marmagutik¡,  Nity¡nanda  Rasa,  
S¡rasvat¡riÀ¶a, A¿vagandh¡dyariÀ¶a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  á£la, D¡ha, K¡sa, KÀaya, M£trak¤cchra, RaktadoÀa, Raktapitta,  
ViÀamajvara, Visarpa, áukrakÀaya 
DOSE  -  3-6 g. 
   
  
22690. Virala (St.Bk) 
VIRALË (Stem Bark) 
Viral¡ consists of dried stem bark of  Diospyros exsculpta Buch . - Ham. syn.  D. 
tomentosa  Roxb. (Fam. Ebenaceae), a small or occasionally large tree found distributed in  
sub-Himalyan tract, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and Orissa.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Tindukah, Tinduki 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Kend, Gaab 
English:Gaub Persimon, Indian Persimon 
Gujrati  :Timbaru 
Hindi    :Gaabh, Tendu, Kendu 
Kannada:Holitupare, Kushaarta 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Panchchi, Pananchi, Panachcha 
Marathi:Temburani 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:Tendu 
Tamil   :Panichchai, Tumbika 
Telugu  :Tinduki, Tumikechettu 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Bark available in pieces of variable lengths, usually 1 to 1.5cm thick, light brown  
in colour, surface uneven with exfoliating  rectangular  scales, slightly  curved, outer  
surface ash coloured, inner surface brownish, striate but smooth; fracture, granular;  
odour, characteristic, taste, sweet and astringent.
b) Microscopic 
T.S.  shows  a  thick  portion  of  rhytidome;  cork  consists  of  5  or  6  layers  of  
tangentially elongated rectangular, dorsoventrally compressed thin walled cells, a few  
strongly liginified and filled with reddish brown masses; cortex consists of 4 to 6 layers  
of thin walled parenchymatous cells, many containing prismatic calcium oxalate crystals,  
measuring 20 to 70  µ and starch grains about 6 to 10  µ; tanniniferous cells present;  
phloem traversed by uniseriate medullary rays; sieve tube associated with companion  
cells; phloem parenchyma consists of  cells with thin, dark reddish brown walls many of  
the cells contain calcium oxalate crystals mostly prismatic type but a few clusters also  
227observed; patches of fibres present with a fairly large lumen; sclereids occur in groups of  
8 to 10, oval to elongate in shape, measuring 45 to 175 µ in length with thick striated  
walls, the lumen is very small often reduced to a line; pit canals present.
Powder -Ash colour, coarse; fragments of thick-walled cork cells with dense brown  
content; sclereids elongated and oval shaped showing pit canals with narrow lumen;  
calcium oxalate crystal in the form of prisms and clusters; a few yellowish tannin cells.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   15   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   5    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     1.5  per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     2    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' (E . Merck grade) plate  
using Chloroform : Acetone (98 : 2) shows under  UV (366 nm) two fluorescent zones at  
Rf. 0.88 (blue) and 0.93 (green). On spraying with Anisaldehyde - Sulphuric acid reagent  
and heating the plate for five minutes at 105oC six spots appear at Rf. 0.32 (pink), 0.49  
(pink), 0.56 (grey), 0.71(dark pink), 0.88 (pink) and 0.93 (pink).
 
 CONSTITUENTS  -  Triterpenoids (Lupeol, Betulin, Betulinic acid, Oleanolic acid) and  
Sterol.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Guru, Snigdha 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Madhura 
Karma   :Gr¡h¢,  Kaphahara,  Pittahara,  Vra¸aropa¸a,  Jihv¡j¡·yakara,  
Savar¸akara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Nayagrodh¡di Kv¡tha C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Aruci, Atis¡ra, Bhagna, Medoroga, Prameha, Raktapitta, Udarda,  
Vibandha, Vra¸a, Yoniroga, Pittaroga, Kar¸asr¡va, Agnidagdha  
Vra¸a, Atidagdha Vra¸a, T¤Àa, Daha 
DOSE  -  5 - 10 g.  
22891. Vishala (Rt) 
VIáALË (Root) 
Vi¿al¡  consists  of  dried  root  of  Trichosanthes  bracteata  (Lam.)  Voigt  (Fam.  
Cucurbitaceae), a large perennial, upto 9 m in height, dioecious, branched, woody tendril  
climber, commonly growing in moist thickets from the Himalayas to the south, ascending  
upto an altitude of 2,500 m.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:Mah¡k¡la, Gav¡dan¢ 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:Maakaal 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :Raataan Indraayan 
Hindi    :Maakaal, Mahar Kaundala, Lal Indraayan, Mahakaal 
Kannada:Avagudehannu 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:Kaakkattonti 
Marathi:Kaundal, Kavandal 
Oriya   :Mahaakaal 
Punjabi:Kaehree, Aankorattai 
Tamil   :Korattai 
Telugu  :Erraa Chedupucca 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Well developed fibrous roots, pale yellow to creamish-brown, available in pieces,  
4 to 15 cm long, 0.3 to 2 cm thick; cylindrical and slightly curved; deeply grooved  
longitudinally;  external  surface,  dusty,  shrivelled,  rough  due  to  exfoliating  cork,  
longitudinal fissures and root scars; fracture, fibrous; taste, bitter and astringent.
b) Microscopic 
Root-  Root  shows  multi-layered  cork,  outer  layers  exfoliating,  inner  of  
rectangular cells, cortex narrow with a row of sclereids externally and shows presence of  
patches of fibres; phloem, narrow of small polygonal cells; bulk of root composed of  
large rounded vessels arranged in radiating rows interspersed by dominant strands of  
multiseriate medullary rays filled completely with starch grains; pith absent.
Powder- Deep creamish-brown; abundant sclereids of various shapes, mostly in groups,  
isodiametric sclereids 20 to 30  µ, thick-walled with round lumen, strongly striated;  
229fibres,  singly  and  in  groups;  cork  cells;  well  developed  reticulately  thickened  and  
border-pitted vessels; starch grains, mostly simple.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   14   per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   3    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     1    per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     4    per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel 'G' plate (0.2 mm thick)  
using chloroform : methanol (9:1) shows spots at Rf 0.16, 0.42, 0.63, 0.69, 0.77 and 0.83  
(all purple) on spraying with vanillin-sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at  
105oC for about ten minutes.
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Saponins, trichosanthin.
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Ka¶u, Tikta 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara, Pittahara, V¡maka, ViÀaghna, Pras£tik¤ta 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  P¡n¢ya Kalya¸aka Gh¤ta, Vi¿¡l¡di C£r¸a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Granthi, Gulma, Jvara, K¡mal¡, K¡sa, KuÀ¶ha, Prameha, Sl¢pada,  
Sv¡sa,  V¤ddhi,  Vra¸a,  ËmadoÀa,  Antarv¤ddhi,  Stanapid¡,  Pl
¢hodara, Ga¸·amaya, M£·hagarbha 
DOSE  -  1 -3 g.   
   
  
23092. Vyaghranakha(Fr) 
VYËGHRANAKHA (Fruit) 
Vy¡ghranakha consists of mature fruit of Capparis sepiaria Linn. syn. C. zeylanica 
Linn. f. (Fam. Capparidaceae), a perennial climbing shrub with hooked stipular spines,  
distributed throughout India, in the plains.
SYNONYMS 
 
Sanskrit:AhiÆsr¡, Vy¡ghr¡yudha 
Assamese:-- 
Bengali:-- 
English:-- 
Gujrati  :-- 
Hindi    :Baghanai, Kanthari, Kareruaa 
Kannada:Kathiramullu, Mulhukallari 
Kashmiri:-- 
Malayalam:-- 
Marathi:Ardanti, Vyaghranakh, Wag, Wagati 
Oriya   :-- 
Punjabi:-- 
Tamil   :Atandai, Kattukathiri, Marandan, Thoratti 
Telugu  :Nalla uppi 
Urdu    :-- 
DESCRIPTION 
a) Macroscopic
Subglobose, many seeded berry; green when young, red brown when ripe, 3 to 4  
cm in diameter, on a greatly thickened stalk; seeds are trigonal, 4 to 5 mm long, 3 to 4  
mm wide, 2 to 3 mm thick with white thin covering; seed coat hard.
b) Microscopic 
Fruit - Epicarp shows thick cuticle covering the single layered epidermal cells  
followed by thick walled parenchyma, filled with yellow contents, mesocarp composed  
of thick walled parenchyma, having groups of pitted sclereids at places along with some  
vascular strands, endocarp contains collapsed cells, abundant oil globules present.
Seed - T.S. shows testa having thick cuticle; with a single layered, laterally elongated,  
loosely packed, pigmented, epidermal cells, followed by 8 to 10 layers of compactly  
arranged circular pitted stone cells with very thick wall and narrow lumen; tegmen  
231consists of collapsed cells; endosperm parenchyma filled with oil and aleurone grains,  
oil cells with yellowish oil at some places.
Powder - Reddish brown, sticky, shows sclereids, parenchymatous cells filled with oil  
and cells filled with aleurone grains.
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH 
 
Acid-insoluble ash                      Not more than   1    per cent, Appendix      2.2.4. 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         Not less than     30   per cent, Appendix    2.2.6. 
Water-soluble extractive           Not less than     26   per cent, Appendix    2.2.7. 
Foreign matter                          Not more than   2    per cent, Appendix      2.2.2. 
Total Ash                                  Not more than   8    per cent, Appendix      2.2.3. 
 
T.L.C. 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on silica gel 'G' (0.2 mm thick ness) plate using  
toluene : methanol (6:3) shows nine bands at Rf. 0.12, 0.23, 0.32, 0.53, 0.56, 0.61, 0.64,  
0.71, 0.86 (all brown), on spraying with 5% Ethanolic-sulphuric acid reagent and heating  
the plate for ten minutes at 105oC.
  
CONSTITUENTS  -  Thioglucoside glucocapparin, n-triacontane, á-amyrin and fixed oil.
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION 
Rasa :Madhura, Ka¶u, Tikta, KaÀ¡ya 
Guna :Laghu, RukÀa 
Virya :UÀ¸a 
Vipaka :Ka¶u 
Karma   :Kaphahara, V¡tahara, Var¸ya, ViÀaghna, Ka¸·ughna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS  -  Bal¡ Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  -  Bhrama, Jvara, Ka¸·u, Ko¶ha, KuÀ¶ha, Prav¡hik¡, Raktapradara,  
SarpaviÀa,  V¡tavik¡ra,  Vra¸a,  ViÀvik¡ra,  P¢daka,  Graharoga,  
Mukhadurgandha 
DOSE  -  2-6 g. 
  
232THE AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA  
OF  
INDIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA OF 
INDIA 
 
 
 
  II  THE AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA OF 
INDIA 
 
 
 
 
PART –I 
VOLUME- VI 
First Edition 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY 
WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH 
NEW DELHI 
2008 
  III  CONTENTS                                 
                                                                                                     PAGE 
         
LEGAL NOTICE . . . . . .   IX  
GENERAL NOTICE . . . . . .               X 
PREFACE . . . . . .  XIV  
INTRODUCTION . . . . . .  XX  
CONTRIBUTING LABORATORIES & INSTITUTIONS . . .            XXVIII 
 
MONOGRAPHS 
 
1.  Ādārī (Lf.) Acacia pennata  (L.) Willd.            1  
2.  ¡mragandhi-guggulu (Lf.) Balsamodendron caudata  Mauch           3  
3.  Ara ´ya -s¦ra ´a (Tuber ) Synantherias sulvatica  Schott Gen.Aocja   5  
4.  ¡r¢ro °a (Rz.) Maranta arundinacea  L.                              7  
5.  Asthi ¨º¬ khal ¢ (Aerial Part) Cissus quadrangularis  L.                             9 
6.  Bh ¦take º¤ (Fr.) Selinum vaginatum C.B. Clarke                  12 
7.  Bh ¦take º¤ (Rz.)  Selinum vaginatum C.B. Clarke                  14 
8.  B¤japatr ¢ (Wh. Pl.) Adiantum cappillus- veneris  L.                   16 
9.  Bimb ¤ (Lf.) Coccinia grandis  (L.) Voigt                        19 
     10. Bimb £ (St.)  Coccinia grandis  (L.) Voigt                        21 
     11. B¨hat Dugdhik ¢ (Wh.Pl.) Euphorbia hirta  L.                                       23 
     12. B¨hat ¤(Wh.Pl.)   Solanum anguivi Lam.                                 26 
     13. Ca ´aka (Wh. Pl.) Cicer arietinum L.                                       29  
     14. D¢ruharidr ¢ (Fr.) Berberis aristata  DC.                                  32 
  15. Dhava (Fr.) Anogeissus latifolia  Wall.                            34  
  16. Dhava (St. Bk.) Anogeissus latifolia Wall.                            36  
  17. Dv ¤p¢ntara Damanaka (Wh.Pl.) Artemisia absinthium  L.                               38 
  18. Dv ¤p¢ntara ¹at ¢var ¤ (Rt.) Asparagus officinalis  L.                               41 
  19. Elav ¢lukam (Rt.) Prunus avium L.                                          43 
  20. Elav ¢lukam (St. Bk.) Prunus avium L.                                          45 
  21. Era ´² akarka °¤ (Fr.) Carica papaya L.                                         47  
  22. Era ´² akarka °¤ (Rt.) Carica papaya L.                                         49  
  23. Gandha ºiph ¢ (Wh.Pl.) Pavonia odorata Willd.                               51 
  24. Gr ¤¾ machatraka (Wh. Pl.) Mollugo cerviana Seringe                           54  
  25. Gok ¾ura (Wh. Pl.) Tribulus terrestris L.                                   56 
  26. Granthim ¦la (Rz.) Alpinia calcarata Rosc .                               59  
  27. Gulad ¢ud ¤ (Lf.) Chrysanthemum indicum L.                         61  
  28. Haritama ®jar ¤ (Wh.Pl.)  Acalypha indica L.                                       63  
  29. Hasti ºu´²¤ (Wh. Pl.) Heliotropium indicum  L.                              66  
  30. Ind ¤vara (Rz.) Monochoria vaginalis Presl                         68 
  31. Jalakumbh ¤ (Wh.Pl.) Pistia stratiotes L.                                        70 
  32. J¤vant ¤ (Rt.)  Leptadenia reticulata  W.& A.                     73  
  33. Ka ´°ak ¤gulma (Aerial Part) Lycium barbarum L.                                    75  
  34. Karaphs ¢ (Rt.) Apium graveolens L.                                    78 
  35. Ka °ugulma (Wh.Pl.) Toddalia asiatica (L.) Lam.                         80 
  36. Ke ºar ¢ja (Wh. Pl.) Wedelia calendulacea Less non Rich          83  
  37. Ketak ¤ (Stilt Rt.)  Pandanus odoratissimus L. f.                      86 
  38. K¤°am ¢r¤ (Lf.)  Aristolochia bracteata  Retz.                        88                           
  39. Kum ¢r¤vetra (Rz.) Calamus thwaitesii   Becc.                            90 
  40. Kusumbha (Fr.) Carthamus tinctorius  L.                               92 
  41. Kusumbha (Lf.) Carthamus tinctorius L.                               94  
  42. Kusumbha (Fl.) Carthamus tinctorius  L.                               96   IV    43. Laghu Haritamanjari (Rt.) Acalypha fruticosa  Forsk.                            99 
  44. Laghupatra-var ¾¢ bh ¦ (Wh.Pl.) Trianthema decandra L.                             101 
  45. Lohitaniry ¢sa (Exd.) Dracaena cinnabari  Balf. f.                       104 
  46. M¢dhav ¤ (Fl.) Hiptage benghalensis  L.                             106  
  47. Matsyapatrik ¢ (Wh.Pl.) Merremia tridentata (L .) Hall.f.                 108  
  48. Med ¢ (Rz.) Polygonatum cirrhifolium Royle                111 
  49. N¢d¤hingu (Exd.) Gardenia gummifera  L. f.                           113 
  50. N¢h¤ (Wh.Pl.) Enicostemma axillare (Lam.) A. Raynal.    115  
  51. Nikocaka (Kernel) Pinus gerardiana Wall.                               118 
  52. Panasa (Rt. Bk.) Artocarpus heterophyllus  Lamk.                 120 
  53. Papa °ah (Rt.) Pavetta indica L.                                          122 
  54. Par ´ayav ¢n¤ (Lf.) Coleus amboinicus  Lour.                             124                  
  55. Patra snuh ¤ (Latex) Euphorbia nivulia  Buch.- Ham.                   127 
  56. Pi ´² a Tagara (Rz.) Asarum europaeum  L.             129 
  57. P¤ta-ka ®can ¢ra (Fl.) Bauhinia racemosa  Lamk.                            131     
  58. Rakta Citraka (Rt.)  Plumbago indica L.                                      133 
  59. Roh ¤taka (St.Bk.) Tecomella undulata (Sm.) Seem.                 135  
  60. ¹¢ la (Ht. Wd.) Shorea robusta Gaertn.                                137  
  61. ¹¢ laparni (Wh.Pl.) Desmodium gangeticum  DC.                       139           
  62. ¹am ¤ (Lf.) Prosopis cineraria Druce                          142 
  63. Saurabhanimba (Lf.) Murraya koenigii (L.) Spreng                       145 
  64. ¹itiv ¢raka (Sd.) Celosia argentea L.                           148  
  65. ¹iva-n¤l¤ (Rt.& St.) Indigofera aspalathoides Vahl ex DC.          150 
  66. ¹le ¾m¢taka (Fr.) Cordia dichotoma  Forst. f.                            152  
  67. ¹le ¾m¢taka (St. Bk.) Cordia dichotoma  Forst. f.                            154  
  68. ¹l¤pad ¢rikanda (Tuber) Typhonium trilobatum Schott                        156  
  69. Sphitak ¤°¢ r¤ (Rz.) Dryopteris filix-mas  (L.) Schott                    158  
  70. Sp ¨kk ¢ (Wh. Pl.) Anisomeles malabarica  (L.) R.Br. ex Sims   160 
  71. Sruvav ¨k¾a (Fr.)  Flacourtia indica  (Burm.f.) Merr.                 163 
  72. Sth ¦lael ¢ (Fr.) Amomum subulatum  Roxb.                           165 
  73. ¹ukan ¢s¢ (Rz.) Corallocarpus epigaeus  Benth.ex Hook. f.   167 
  74. ¹veta Vetasa (Lf.)  Salix alba L.                                                  169 
  75. Takkola (Fr.) Illicium verum Hook. f.                                 171  
  76. Tinduka (Fr.) Diospyros peregrina  Gurke                          173 
  77. Tr ¢yam ¢´¢   (Rz.) Gentiana kurroo Royle                                 175  
  78. Tripak ¾¤ (Wh. Pl.) Coldenia procumbens  L.                               177 
  79. Tuvaraka (Sd.) Hydnocarpus pentandra  (Buch.-Ham.)         180  
                                                                                                            Oken  
  80. ¥¾ and ¤ (Wh.Pl.) Glinus lotoides L.                                          182 
  81. Vajr ¢nna (Lf.Base) Pennisetum typhoides (Burm.f.) Stapf &      185  
                      C.E. Hubb.  
  82. Valuka- saka (Lf.) Gisekia pharnaceoides L.                             187  
  83. Vanya-a ºvagola (Lf.)  Plantago lanceolata L.                                  189 
  84. Vetra (Rz.) Calamus rotang  L.                                        191 
  85. Visanika (Wh.Pl.) Pergularia daemia (Forsskal) Choiv.           193 
  86. V¨ant ¢mlaphala (Fr. Rind) Garcinia pedunculata  Roxb.                        196 
  87. V¨ºcikakanda (Rz.) Doronicum hookeri  C.B.Clarke                   198 
  88.  D¢rusit ¢ Taila (Cinnamomum Oil) Cinnamomum zeylanicum  Blume                 200 
  89. Gandhap ¦ra Patra Taila                                                         Gaultheria fragrantissima Wall.                  202 
  90. Gogh ¨ta (Clarified Cow’s Butter)   -                204 
  91. Guda (Jaggery)   Saccharum officinarum L.                           206 
92. Jala (Potable Water)                                                                  -                                                                208 
  93.  Karp ¦ra (Natural Camphor)   Cinnamomum camphora (L.) Nees &         210  V                                                                                                             Eberm. and Ocimum kilimandscharicum     
                                                                                                            Guerke                                              
94. Lavanga Taila (Clove Oil)   Syzygium aromaticum Merril & Perry              212 
95. Madhu (Honey)   Apis  sps.                                                            214      
96. Peppermint- Satva (Menthol)   Mentha  sps.                                                       216 
97. Śarkar ¢ (Sugar)   -                                                                         218 
98. Sarsapa Taila (Mustard Oil)   Brassica campestris L.                                      220 
99. Tailapar ´a Taila (Eucalyptus Oil)   Eucalyptus globulus Labill                                222 
100. Tila Taila (Sesamum Oil)   Sesamum indicum L.                                         224 
101. Yavani Satva (Thymol)   Thymus vulgaris L. and Trachyspermum          226   
                                                                                                                   ammi  (L.) Sprague 
 
APPENDIX-1 
 
1.1 Apparatus for Tests and Assays                                                                                          230  
1.1.1. - Nessler Cylinder                                                                                                 230 
1.1.2. – Sieves                                                                                                                 230 
1.1.3. – Thermometers                                                                                                    231                                                                          
1.1.4. - Ultra- Violet Lamp (For general purposes & for chromatography work)          231 
1.1.5.   - Volumetric Glass War                                                                                         231 
1.1.6    - Weights and Balances                                                                                          231 
1.1.7    - Muslin Cloth                                                                                                        232 
 
APPENDIX -2 
 
2.1 Tests and Determinations  233  
        2.1.1.-  Microscopic identification 233 
         2.1.2. – Microscopical Methods of Examining Crude Vegetable Drugs 236 
          2.1.3. – Types of Stomata  239 
         2.1.4. – Determination of Stomatal Index 240 
         2.1.5. – Determination of Palisade Ratio 240 
         2.1.6. – Determination of Vein-Islet Number 241 
         2.1.7. – Determination of Stomatal Number 242 
  
2.2 Determination of Quantitative Data 242   
       2.2.1.-Net Content   242 
        2.2.2.-Foreign Matter  242 
        2.2.3.-Determination of Toatal Ash242 
        2.2.4.-Determination of Acid Insoluble Ash 242 
        2.2.5.- Determination of Water Soluble Ash 243 
        2.2.6. Determination of Sulphated Ash 243 
        2.2.7.- Determination of Alcohol Soluble Extractive 243 
        2.2.8.- Determination of Water Soluble Extractive 243 
        2.2.9.-Determination of Ehter Soluble Extractive (Fixed Oil Content) 243 
        2.2.10.- Determination of Moisture Content ( Loss on Drying) 243 
       2.2.11.- Determination of Water Insoluble Matter 244 
         2.2.12. -Determination of Volatile Oil in Drugs 244 
        2.2.13. Special Processes Used in Alkaloidal Assays 245 
                    2.2.13.a. – Continuous Extraction of Drug 245 
                    2.2.13.b. – Tests for Complete Extraction of Alkaloids  245        
        2.2.14.-Thin- Layer Chromatography (TLC) 246  VI          2.2.15.-Starch Estimation (Mont Gomery, 1957) [Spectrophotometric method] 248 
        2.2.16.-Sugar Estimation (Mont Gomery,1957)[Spectrophtometric method] 248 
        2.2.17.-Fatty Oil Estimation  249 
        2.2.18. –Test for Argemone Oil (Mustard Oil) 249 
        2.2.19.- Test for the Presence of Cottonseed Oil(Halphen Test) 249 
        2.2.20. –Test for Clove Oil- Alkali- Soluble Matter        249 
        2.2.21. –Test for Eucaluptus Oil  249 
        2.2.22. –Determination of Acidity 250 
        2.2.23. -Protein Estimation (Lowry  et al ., 1951) 251 
        2.2.24.- Method for Alkaloid Estimation 251 
       2.2.25.- Determination of Esters  251 
 
2.3.  Limit Tests  252  
        2.3.1.- Limit Test for Arsenic  252 
        2,3,2.- Limit Test for Chlorides  256 
        2.3.3.- Limit Test for Heavy Metals 256 
        2.3.4.-Limit Test for Iron  259 
        2.3.5.- Limit Test for Lead  259 
        2.3.6.-Limit Test for Sulphates  261 
        2.3.7.-Heavy Metals by Atomic Absorption Spectorphotometry 261 
        2.3.8. –Determination of Lead, Cadmium, Arsenic, Mercury and Copper 263 
        2.3.9.-Determination of Calcium Oxide 266 
         
2.4. Microbial Limit Tests  266  
       2.4.1.- Total Aerobic Microbial Count 275  
        2.4.2.- Tests for Specified Miicro-Organisms 277 
     
 
2.5. Pesticide Residue  280 
       2.5.1.- Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis of Pesticide Residues 282 
        2.5.2.- Test for Pesticides   283 
        2.5.3.- Quantitative Analysis  284 
 
2.6. Gas Chromatography  286      
 
2.7. Test for Aflatoxins  288  
  VII  APPENDIX-3  
                
                3.1. Physical Tests and Determinations 290              
                       3.1.1. Refractive Index  290 
                          3.1.2. Weight Per Millimetre and Specific Gravity 290 
                          3.1.3. Determination of pH Values 291 
                  
                  3.2. Determination of Melting Range and Congealing Range 291  
                       3.2.1.- Determination of Melting Range 291 
                          3.2.2.- Determination of Congealing Range 293 
                       3.2.3.- Determination of Boiling Range  294   
 
 3.3. Determination of Optical Rotation and Specific Optical Rotation 296    
 3.4. Determination of Viscosity  297  
 3.5. Determination of Total Solids  298  
 3.6. Solubility in Water   298  
 3.7. Determination of Saponification Value 298  
 3.8. Determination of Iodine Value  298  
 3.9. Determination of Acid Value  298 
 3.10. Determination of Peroxide Value 298  
 3.11. Determination of Unsopanifiable Matter 301  
 3.12. Detection of Mineral Oil (Holde’s Test) 301  
 3.13. RancidityTest (Kreis Test)  301  
 3.14. Determination of Reichert Meissl And Polenske Value 301  
 3.15. Determination of Alcohol Content 301  
 
APPENDIX- 4   
                
               4.1. Reagents and Solutions  307  
  VIII  APPENDIX-5 
               5.1. Chemical Tests and Assays  336  
                       5.1.1.- Estimation of Total Phenolic                                                                                    336 
                          5.1.2.- Estimation of Total Tannins                     336 
                          5.1.3.- Estimation of Sugars  336 
                                      5.1.3.1.-Reducing sugars  337 
                                      5.1.3.2.- Total sugars  337 
                                      5.1.3.3.- Non-reducing sugars 337  
                            5.1.4.- Feihe’s Test   338 
                            5.1.5.- Aniline Chloride Test  338 
                            5.1.6.- Determination of Sulphur Dioxide 338 
                            5.1.7.- Determination of Total Reducing Sugars, Sucrose and Fructose-Glucose 340  
                                        Ratio 
                 5.2. Estimation of Curcumin by TLC Densitometer                                                          341                  
                            5.2.1.-Determination of Aluminium 342 
                            5.2.2.- Determination of Borax  343 
                            5.2.3.- Determination of Calcium                                                                                            343  
                            5.2.4.- Determination of Copper                                                                                              343 
                            5.2.5.- Determination of Iron  344 
                            5.2.6.- Determination of Magnesium 345                                                                                                                 
                            5.2.7.- Determination of Mercury                     345 
                         5.2.8.- Determination of Silica  345 
                         5.2.9.- Estimation of Sodium and Potassium by Flame Photometer 345 
                            5.2.10.- Determination of Sodium Chloride 346 
                            5.2.11.- Determination of Sulphur346 
                            5.2.12.- Qualitative Reactions Some Radicals 346 
 
APPENDIX - 6                  
 
                  6.1. Weights and Measures  349          
 6.1.1. –Metric Equivalents of Classical Weights and Measures 349  
       
                  6.2. – Metric system  350  
 
APPENDIX - 7    
                  
                7.1. Classical Ayurvedic References 351  
 
INDEX                                                                                                                     388   
 
English Equivalents of Ayurvedic Cllinical Conditions and Diseases  
 
Monographs published in Volume – I  435  
Monographs published in Volume – II  437 
Monographs published in Volume – III  439  
Monographs published in Volume – IV  441  
Monographs published in Volume – V  443  
 
 
  IX  LEGAL NOTICES  
 
In India there are laws dealing with drugs that are the subject of monographs which follow. These 
monographs should be read subject to the restrictions imposed by these laws wherever the y are applicable. 
 
It is expedient that enquiry be made in each case in order to ensure that the provisions of the law are being 
complied with. 
 
In general, the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 (subsequently amended in 1964 a nd 1982), the Dangerous 
Drugs Act, 1930 and the Poisons Act, 1919 and the rules framed thereunder should be consulted. 
 
  Under the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India (A.P.I.), Part-I, Vol.VI, is the 
book of standards for compound drugs included therein and the standards prescribe d in the Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopoeia of India, Part-I, Vol.VI, would be official. If considered necessary these standards can be amended 
and the Chairman of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee authorised to issue such amendments. Whenever 
such amendments are issued the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, Part-I, Vol. VI , would be deemed to have been 
amended accordingly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  X  
 GENERAL NOTICES  
 
 
Title - The title of the book is “Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India”.  Wher ever the abbreviation A.P.I. is used, it 
may be presumed to stand for the same and the supplements thereto. 
 
Name of the Drugs - The name given on the top of each monograph of the drug is in Sanskrit  as mentioned in the 
Ayurvedic classics and/or in the Ayurvedic Formulary of India, Part-I a nd Part-II will be considered official. These 
names have been arranged in English alphabetical order. The Latin nam e (taxonomical nomenclature) of each drug 
as found in authentic scientific literature has been provided in the m onograph in the introductory paragraph. The 
official name will be the main title of the drug and its scientific name will a lso be considered as legal name. 
 
Introductory Para  - Each monograph begins with an introductory paragraph indicating the part, s cientific name of 
the drug in Latin with short description about its habit, distribution and method of collection, if  any. 
 
Synonyms -  Synonyms of each drug appearing in each monograph in Sanskrit, English, Hindi, Urdu and other 
Indian regional languages have been mentioned as found in the classical  texts, Ayurvedic Formulary of India, Part-
I and Part-II as procured from the experts, scholars of Ayurveda and officials in the f ield from different states. 
 
Italics -  Italic type has been used for scientific name of the drug appeari ng in the introductory paragraph of each 
monograph as also for chemicals and reagents, substances or processes described in Appe ndix. 
 
Odour and Taste -  Wherever a specific odour has been found it has been mentioned but the des cription as 
‘odourless’ or ‘no odour’ has in many cases been avoided in the description, as larg e numbers of drugs have got no 
specific odour. The “odour” is examined by directly smelling 25 g of the  powdered drug contained in a package or 
freshly powdered. If the odour is discernible the sample is rapidly trans ferred to an open container and re-examined 
after 15 minutes. If the odour persists to be discernible, it is described as having odour. 
 
The “Taste” of a drug is examined by taking a small quantity of 85 mesh powder by a tip of moist glass rod 
and applying it on tongue previously rinsed with water. This may not be done in case if poisonous drugs, indicated 
in monograph. 
 
Mesh Number  - Wherever the powdering of the drug has been required the sieve “Mesh Number 85” has been 
used. This will not apply for drugs containing much oily substance.           
 
Weights and Measures -  The metric system of weights and measures is employed. Weight s are given in multiples 
or fractions of a gramme (g) or of a milligram (mg). Fluid m easures are given in multiples or fractions of millilitre 
(ml). 
 
When the term “drop” is used, the measurement is to be made by means  of a tube, which delivers in 20 
drops 1 gram of distilled water at 15 oC. 
 
Metric measures are required by the Pharmacopoeia to be graduated at 20 oC and all measurements 
involved in the analytical operations of the Pharmacopoeia are intende d, unless otherwise stated to be made at that 
temperature. 
 
Identity, Purity and Strength - Under the heading “Identification” tests are provided as an aid t o identification 
and are described in their respective monographs. 
  XI  The term “Foreign Matter” is used to designate any matter, which does not form par t of the drug as defined 
in the monograph. Vegetable drugs used as such or in formulations, should be dul y identified and authenticated and 
be free from insects, pests, fungi, micro-organisms, pesticides, a nd other animal matter including animal excreta, 
be within the permitted and specified limits for lead, arsenic and heavy metals, and show no abnormal odour, 
colour, sliminess, mould or other evidence of deterioration. 
 
The quantitative tests e.g. total ash, acid-insoluble ash, water-sol uble ash, alcohol-soluble extractive, 
water- soluble extractive, ether-soluble extractive, moisture content, volat ile oil content and assays are the methods 
upon which the standards of Pharmacopoeia depend. The methods for assays are  described in their respective 
monographs and for other quantitative tests, methods are not repeated in the text of monographs but only the 
corresponding reference of appropriate appendix is given. The analyst is  not precluded from employing an alternate 
method in any instance if he is satisfied that the method, which he us es, will give the same result as the 
Pharmacopoeial Method. In suitable instances the methods of microanalys is, if of equivalent accuracy, may be 
substituted for the tests and assays described. However, in the eve nt of doubt or dispute the methods of analysis of 
the Pharmacopoeia are alone authoritative. 
 
Standards  - For statutory purpose, statements appearing in the API, Part-I, Vol. V, under Description, those of 
definition of the part and source plants, and Identity, Purity and Strength, shall constitut e standards.  
 
Thin Layer Chromatography (T.L.C.) -  Under this head, wherever given, the number of spots and Rf values of 
the spots with their colour have been mentioned as a guide for identification of the drug and not  as Pharmacopoeial 
requirement. However, the analyst may use any other solvent syste m and detecting reagent in any instance if he is 
satisfied that the method which he uses, even by applying known refere nce standards, will give better result to 
establish the identity of any particular chemical constituent reported to be prese nt in the drug. 
 
Quantities to be Weighed for Assays and Tests - In all description quantity of the substance to be taken for 
testing is indicated. The amount stated is approximate but the quantity  actually used must be accurately weighed 
and must not deviate by more than 10 per cent from the one stated. 
 
Constant Weight -  the term “Constant Weight” when it refers to drying or ignition means that two consecutive 
weighings do not differ by more than 1.0 mg per g of the substance tak en for the determination, the second 
weighing following an additional hour of drying on further ignition. 
 
Constituents -  Under this head only the names of important chemical constituents, gr oups of constituents reported 
in research publications have been mentioned as a guide and not as pharmacopoeial requireme nt. 
 
Percentage of Solutions -  In defining standards, the expression per cent (%), is used, according t o circumstances, 
with one of the four meanings given below. 
 
Per cent w/w (percentage weight in weight) expresses the number  of grammes of active substance, in 100 
grammes of product. 
 
Per cent w/v (Percentage weight in volume) expresses the number  of grammes of active substance in 100 
millilitres of product. 
 
Per cent v/v (percentage volume in volume) expresses the number of  millilitres of active substance in 100 
millilitres of product. 
 
Per cent v/w (percentage volume in weight) expresses the number of millilitres of active substance in 100 
grammes of product. 
  XII  Percentage of alcohol - All statements of percentage of alcohol (C 2H5OH) refer to percentage by volume at 15.56 
oC. 
Temperature -  Unless otherwise specified all temperatures refer to centigrade (cels ius), thermometric scale. 
 
Solutions -  Unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph, all solutions are prepared wit h purified water. 
 
Reagents and Solutions -  The chemicals and reagents required for the test in Pharmacopoeia  are described in 
Appendices. 
 
Solubility -  When stating the solubilities of Chemical substances the term “Soluble” is nece ssarily sometimes used 
in a general sense irrespective of concomitant chemical changes. 
 
Statements of solubilities, which are expressed as a precise re lation of weights of dissolved substance of 
volume of solvent, at a stated temperature, are intended to apply at  that temperature. Statements of approximate 
solubilities for which no figures are given, are intended to apply at ordinary room tempe rature. 
 
Pharmacopoeial chemicals when dissolved may show slight physical i mpurities, such as fragment of filter 
papers, fibres, and dust particles, unless excluded by definite tests in the individual monog raphs. 
 
When the expression “parts” is used in defining the solubility of a substance, it is t o be understood to mean 
that 1 gramme of a solid or 1 millilitre of a liquid is soluble i n that number of millilitres of the solvent represented 
by the stated number of parts. 
 
When the exact solubility of pharmacopoeial substance is not known, a desc riptive term is used to indicate 
its solubility.  
 
The following table indicates the meaning of such terms :- 
 
Descriptive terms                  Relative quantities of solvent  
Very soluble   Less than 1 part. 
Freely soluble    From 1 to 10 parts. 
Soluble    From 10 to 30 parts. 
Sparingly soluble   From 30 to 100 parts. 
Slightly soluble   From 100 to 1000 parts. 
Very slightly soluble   From 1000 to 10,000 parts. 
Practically insoluble   More than 10,000 parts. 
 
    Therapeutic Uses and Important Formulations – Therapeutic uses and important formulations mentioned in 
this Pharmacopoeia are, as provided in the recognised Ayurvedic clas sics and in the Ayurvedic 
Formulary of India, Part –I and Part-II. 
 
      Doses  –       The doses mentioned in each monograph are in metric system of weight s, which are the approximate 
conversions from classical weights mentioned in Ayurvedic texts. A  conversion table is appended 
giving classical weights of Ayurvedic System of Medicine wi th their metric equivalents. Doses 
mentioned in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India (A.P.I.) are intended m erely for general 
guidance and represent, unless otherwise stated, the average range of quantities per dose which is 
generally regarded suitable by clinicians for adults only when administered oral ly.  
  XIII   It is to be noted that the relation between doses in metric and Ay urvedic systems set forth in the text is of 
approximate equivalence. These quantities are for convenience of presc riber and sufficiently accurate for 
pharmaceutical purposes. 
 
  XIV  Abbreviations of Technical Terms –  The abbreviations commonly employed are as follows: 
 
m  . . . . . . . Metre 
l . . . . . . . Litre 
mm. . . . . . . . Millimetre 
cm. . . . . . . . Centimetre 
µ . . . . . . . Micron (0.001 mm) 
Kg. . . . . . . . Kilogram 
g. . . . . . . . Gramme 
mg. . . . . . . . Milligram 
ml. . . . . . . . Millilitre 
IN. . . . . . . . Normal solution 
0.5 N . . . . . . . Half-normal solution 
0.1 N . . . . . . . Decinormal solution 
1M. . . . . . . . Molar solution 
Fam. . . . . . . . Family 
PS. . . . . . . . Primary Standards 
TS. . . . . . . . Transverse Section 
 
Abbreviations Used for Languages 
 
Sansk.  . . . . . . . Sanskrit 
Assam.  . . . . . . . Assamese 
Beng.  . . . . . . . Bengali 
Eng.  . . . . . . . English 
Guj.  . . . . . . . Gujrati 
Kan.  . . . . . . . Kannada 
Kash.  . . . . . . . Kashmiri 
Mal. . . . . . . . Malayalam 
Mar.  . . . . . . . Marathi 
Ori.  . . . . . . . Oriya 
Puj.  . . . . . . . Punjabi 
Tam.  . . . . . . . Tamil 
Tel.  . . . . . . . Telgu 
  XV  PREFACE 
 
 1. India, due to its unique variety of geographical and climatic factor s, has a rich and varied flora of 
medicinal plants since the dawn of civilization. No wonder that out of a total number of over 15,000 plant species 
in India about 2000 are known to have medicinal properties and some of them are used as home-remedies in the 
rural and remotest parts of the country. 
 2. The vastness of the country with its inadequate means of communica tion and facilities for transport of 
drugs coupled with diverse regional languages, gave rise to a mult itude of synonyms (names in regional languages 
for one species). Further, Ayurveda, being a dynamic professional scie nce, led to the successful use of several 
newer drugs with therapeutic values similar to those which were originally equated with the classical Ayurvedic 
drugs.   These later assumed the name of the very same classi cal drug and continued to be locally collected, sold 
and used in that name since the main drug was locally unavailable a nd substitution became a necessity. Later, in 
the first half of the century, while scientifically identifying  the drugs in vogue in different regions, scientists found 
that there were more than one species, belonging even to different f amilies of plants, claiming the same classical 
name of the Ayurvedic drug. ‘Brahmi’ could be cited as a good example. This created an impression that there 
existed a great controversy about the real identity of Ayurvedic drugs .  Such drugs, were stamped as “controversial 
drugs” without examining their potential as therapeutic equivalents. 
 3. Ayurveda had never been static. Its practitioners had been innovati ve and dynamic in therapeutic 
practice and tried out drugs from the local flora to discoverer new er medicines with the same therapeutic value as 
the classical drugs.  These newer drugs were accepted by the then practising profe ssion as “substitutes”. A study of 
Ayurvedic literature, reveals several references permitti ng the use a substitute drug when the classical drug is not 
available. Such recommendations are based on its therapeutic equivale nce, clinical efficacy, and on equivalent 
status of their Rasa, Guna, Virya, Vipaka and Karma. 
 4. A few classical drugs of Himalayan origin were limited and seasonal in thei r occurrence. They could not 
be grown on plains and hence their use was restricted. By the time they were identified their supply had dwindled 
and commercial substitution started. These drugs are the “Sandigdha D ravyas” (drugs of doubtful identity) one of 
which is the ‘Ashta Varga’, consisting of 8 Single Drugs. 
 5. During the last 100 years of the alien rule social and economic c onditions in India changed due to of 
urbanisation. Ayurvedic physicians took to cities and lost their contac t with forests where their drug sources lay. As 
a consequence of better transport facilities, trade in crude drugs be came easier and suppliers came between the 
Ayurvedic physician and his personal collection of herbs.   Commercial  manufacture of Ayurvedic Medicines in 
factories started. These were the inevitable consequences of the socio-economic changes in the country. The new 
economic set up was such that the Ayurvedic practitioner could no longer  process and prepare his own medicines 
but had to depend on the big pharmaceutical houses and the suppliers of crude dr ugs to whatever extent he needed 
them. There was, in a way, a forced division of labour where he had no choice but to purchase his drugs and no 
means to ascertain the authenticity of the medicines and formulations offer ed to him by the pharmaceutical houses, 
nor was there any Governmental control on the manufacture to ensure the  quality of the medicines marketed, 
prescribed and administered to his patient. 
 6. As an outcome of the first Health Minister’s Conference of 1946, a  Committee under the Chairmanship 
of Lt. Col. R.N. Chopra was appointed in 1946 by the Government of India. It wa s the Chopra Committee that had 
first gone into the question of need for proper identification of Ayurvedi c medicinal plants, control over collection 
and distribution of crude drugs and made positive recommendation for compila tion of an Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopoeia. Thereafter, the Dave Committee (1955) reiterated t he recommendations for compilation of an 
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia. 
 7. The Government of Bombay, was specially interested in the surve y of resources of Ayurvedic Drugs, 
their collection, cultivation, farming, distribution and standardization. T hey, therefore had appointed a Committee 
for Standard and Genuine Ayurvedic Herbs and Drugs in 1955 and subsequently af ter receiving its report with 
fresh set of terms of reference, appointed a second committee cal led the Committee for Standard Ayurvedic Herbs 
and Drugs in 1957 both under the Chairmanship of Vaidya Bapalal Shah, of which Professor A.N. Namjoshi was 
the Member Secretary. The Bapalal Committee had very elabora tely recommended the compilation of the 
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia as an urgent prerequisite for effective control of Ayurvedic Drugs to ensure quality  XVI  assurance. Finally Government of India appointed the “Ayurvedic Resea rch Evaluation Committee”, under the 
Chairmanship of Dr. K.N. Udupa (1958) which had strongly highlighted the urgenc y of the compilation of an 
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia. 
 8. In compliance with some of these recommendations, the Union Government  as also some of the State 
Governments had started taking positive steps. The Government of Bom bay State established its Board of Research 
in Ayurveda, Bombay in 1951, which was subsequently reconstituted in 1955 and 1958. The  Government of India 
established CCRIMH in 1969 for research in all aspects including drug  standardisation in Indian Medicine & 
Homoeopathy. This Council was divided into 4 research councils in 1978 and the research work in Ayurveda and 
Siddha was entrusted to the Central Council for Research in Ayurveda  & Siddha. The PLIM, at Ghaziabad was 
established in 1970 for testing and standardisation of single drugs and com pound formulations. Under the auspices 
of the Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, several survey units in different States were 
established and work of standardisation of single drugs and compound medici nes as also composite research work 
was initiated. The first Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee was  constituted in 1962 under the Chairmanship of 
Col. Sir Ram Nath Chopra. The Committee was reconstituted in 1972 under the Chairmanship of Prof. A.N. 
Namjoshi which took over the work of compilation of the Ayurvedic Form ulary of India as a pre-requisite for 
under taking the work of Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India. 
 9. After publication of the First and the Second part of the Ayurvedic  Formulary of India, Part-III of the 
Formulary is under preparation. A list of single drugs, which enter i nto the formulations, has been prepared.  
Collection of data from published material and from experimental work  in collaborative laboratories to produce 
necessary data is being done under the auspices of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Commi ttee. 
 10. The First and Second Part of the Ayurvedic Formulary of India com prising of some 444 and 191 
formulations respectively cover more than 351 single drugs of plant or igin. This is part of about 500 priority drugs 
of plant origin to come within the ambit of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India. 
 11. While systematic efforts are on to introduce quality control, ove r the ayurvedic drugs during the post-
independence period, it is interesting to note that the great strides  made by the western or modern system of 
medicine, with its formidable armoury of synthetic drugs, chemo-thera peutic agents and antibiotics, are slowing 
down gradually with the realization of their adverse effects ca using damage to the human systems. The western 
world is coming to accept the value of herbal medicines, appreciate  and understand the basic philosophy of 
Ayurveda, which initially appeared to be rather abstract and diffic ult to interpret in terms of modern medical 
sciences. 
 12. With the introduction of legislative measures for quality control , a process initiated some 50 years ago, 
there would be some uniformity in the Ayurvedic medicines marketed, in so far as their identity, purity and 
strength are concerned. The physician and the patient would be assured of the quality of the medicine through 
proper drug control measures. The efforts to publish an Ayurvedic Formula ry of India and to compile the 
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India intend to serve the profession and the public through proper qua lity assurance. 
 13. The Union Government have brought the Ayurvedic Drugs under the purview  of the Drugs and 
Cosmetic Act 1940 from 15-9-1964. The publication of the Ayurvedic Formulary  of India and the Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopoeia of India strengthens the Government in the enforcement of the Act in res pect of standards. 
 14. The State Government found it difficult to implement the requirem ents of the Act, in so far as the 
analytical quality control was concerned, although they had already im plemented the administrative requirements, 
such as manufacturing licenses, qualification of staff, suitability  of premises, equipment etc., The fledgling 
ayurvedic industry could have its own ‘in-house’ standards, as indeed som e had, but it was necessary to subject 
their products to the vigilance of the Regulatory body. 
 15. In view of the need of the hour to implement the Drugs and Cosmeti cs Act, the Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopoeia Committee has made a modest effort to lay down standa rds for single drugs relying on 
experimental data worked out from scratch at the PLIM, Ghaziabad a nd some of the units of the Central Council 
for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha. Absence of  published scientific l iterature on the subject hampered their 
work, and delay was inevitable  
 16. The Western countries did pass through this phase about 150 years ago a nd took up the task of 
preparation for a pharmacopoeia. Endeavor by universities and manufactur es in Britain and other European 
countries resulted in scientific data for drafting the pharmacopoeia l monographs for single drugs.  Thus, scientific  XVII  data was available for compilation of the modern pharmacopoeia, but for compilation of the Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopoeia little information and published data exists and the Ayurv edic Pharmacopoeia Committee had to 
initiate basic research. 
 17. It is worthwhile noting that the principle of quality control for m edicines were well known to the 
Ayurvedic physicians and indeed followed by them in their practice.  T his is evident from the classical Sanskrt 
texts, where elaborate instructions are set down with great visi on, in an astonishingly rational and scholarly 
manner, suitable to the conditions then prevalent. The description of Era nda and Guduci in Bhavaprakasa bear 
witness to this.   Modern methods of analysis advocated in the present  Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia for identity and 
purity have benefited greatly from the original texts.  What moder n medicine has achieved is an explanation of the 
principles of quality control with greater precision, backing them w ith experimental evidence to bring about their 
universal acceptance.   
 18. The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India Part–I , Vol-I, II, III, IV and V comprises 80, 78, 100, 68 and 
92 monographs of Ayurvedic single drugs of plant origin, which go into one or more formulations included in the 
Ayurvedic Formulary of India Part-I and Part-II. In compiling the monographs, the title of each drug has been 
given in Sanskrit as present in the Ayurvedic Formularies of Indi a. This is followed by a definition of the drug 
giving its identity in scientific nomenclature and a very brief  information about its source, occurrence, distribution 
and precautions in collection if any, etc.  This is followed by a lis t of synonyms in Sanskrit and also in the other 
Indian regional languages. The monographs then record detailed Macroscopic  and Microscopic description of the 
drug having pharmacognostic value in identification, especially when the drug is in pow der form.  This volume has 
also included monographs on certain products like ghee, potable water, produc ts of Saccharum officinarum L. like 
sharkara, jaggery and also natural  product like honey. Apart from this, the monog raphs on exotic but domesticated 
plants which are in routine uses are also included, like Eucalyptus oil and Peppermint  satva (Menthol).  Along with 
93 single drugs of plant origin, this volume also includes certain other  drug substances like animal products, 
processed or extracted materials, and major adjuvant, vehicles etc., tha t appear in formulations either as ingredients 
or as processing adjuvant.  
19. The monograph then gives chemical norms and limits under “Identity, P urity and Strength” like 
tolerance for foreign matter, total ash, acid insoluble ash, alcohol s oluble extractive, water soluble extractive, 
volatile oil contents etc. Some of them have a direct bearing on t he purity and strength, while others aid in 
detecting substitution or adulteration, if any. Where possible and known, Assay of an act ive constituent or group of 
constituents like total alkaloids or total volatile oils have been given. However, under the heading ‘Constituents’ 
one or more constituents or group of constituents like oleoresins, essent ial oils, alkaloids have been mentioned 
which only have an informative value based on published research work i n phytochemistry.  In all the proximate 
analytical values set for ash and extractives, only a maximum or  minimum value for limit has been attempted.  It is 
worth mentioning that there is always a wide variation in analyt ical results among crude drugs of plant origin in 
respect of their chemical contents, due to varied climatic conditi ons, geographical distribution, source and season 
of collection and differing methods of storage and preservation. Therefore, variati on in results of chemical analysis 
create a great difficulty in fixing a narrow range of limits  for single drugs. However, the data has been fixed on the 
basis of results from as many samples as possible, procured from different sources . 
 20. In each of the monographs, classical attributes of respective dr ugs according to the doctrine of Rasa, 
Guna, Virya, Vipaka and Karma have been kept intact.  They may appe ar abstract and unsupported by established 
experimental methods to define them, but are considered a reasonable bas is and convenient reference point for a 
clinical classification.  However, since they cannot be validate d by modern scientific methods, they are not 
mandatory. 
 21. The Legal Notices and General Notices have been given for the  attention of the Pharmaceutical 
suppliers and regulatory authorities. Details about the apparatus, rea gents and solutions, tests, methods of 
preparation of specimens for microscopical examinations have been given in Appendices . 
 22. The Committee hopes that the publication of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoe ia of India Part I, Vol. VI 
comprising of 93 single drugs of vegetables origin would add to the requi rements under the Drugs and Cosmetics 
Act.  The regular monitoring of the manufactured and marketed ayurv edic drugs, on the basis of the standards 
prescribed therein would bear evidence of the usefulness of these volum es and help enhance their quality and status 
in revisions for the future.   XVIII   23. The Committee urges the Government of India to recommend the adoption of these monogr aphs for the 
purposes of identity, purity and strength of drugs for use in their Gover nment, Semi-Government and Government 
aided institutions and voluntary public organisations. The Ayurvedic Pharm acopoeia of India, 2005, Part-I, Vol. V 
would be added to Rule 168 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and be notified by  Government as standards to be 
complied with by the manufacturers for sale or distribution of Ayurve dic drugs.   Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of 
India Part-I, Vol. I, II, III, IV and V are already included in the First Schedule of Drug s & Cosmetics Act 1940. 
 24. The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee records the appreciation of  the Directors, Officer In-
charges, Project Officers and scientific staff of all the c ontributing laboratories and institutions those were 
associated with the project work on developing Pharmacopoeial Standards . The present volume of Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopoeia of India comprises the technical work contributed by these laboratorie s and institutions.  
 25. On behalf of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee, I have pleas ure in placing on records our 
sincere thanks and appreciation to the Government of India, State Gove rnments, Institutions, Councils, Scientists 
and Ayurvedic Scholars for their whole hearted co-operation in preparing  the monographs on Single Drugs. I 
sincerely thank all the members of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia C ommittee without whose co-operation this 
volume would not have seen the light of day. My thanks are due Dr. D.R. Lohar, Director I/c, PLIM, Ghaziabad 
and his colleagues viz., Dr. Rajeev Kr. Sharma, Senior Scientific  Officer (Pharmacognosy), Shri N.S. Mahara, R.O. 
(Phg.), Dr. Jai Prakash, R.O. (Chem.), Shri V. C. Srivastava, Sr. R esearch Assistant (Chem.), Shri B.B. Prasad, 
R.A. (Botany), Shri S.K. Gaur, R.A. (Chem.), Shri C. Arunachalam, R.A. (Bo tany), Shri R.K. Pawar, R.A. 
(Chem.), Shri Rajendra Singh, Lab. Asstt. (Chem.) and Shri Sanjeev Gupt a, Lab. Asstt. (Botany) who deserve my 
special thanks for this endeavour.  My thanks are also due to Dr. M.M . Padhi, Deputy Director (Tech.); Shri K.G. 
Vasantha Kumar, Asst. Director (Chem.), Dr. Pramila Pant, Resea rch Officer (Chem.), Sri. Ravinder Singh, 
Research Officer (Chem.), Dr. Chhote Lal, Dr. A.K.S. Bhadoria and Dr.M .N. Rangne, Dr. S.K. Meher, Research 
Officer (Ayu.), Dr. Bishnu Priya Dhar, Research Officer (Pharm acognosy), Dr. K. Sandhya Rani, S.R.F. (Ayu.) 
and other associated officers, who contributed a lot in finalizing the volume. My special thanks to Mr. Sandeep 
Kumar, Mr. Ashish Kumar & Ms. Deepti Anand, D.E.O., who took pains in typing  and arranging all the technical 
data into a final shape.  
 
 
 
 
(DR. G. S. LAVEKAR)  
DIRECTOR CCRAS & MEMBER SECRETARY 
AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA COMMITTEE 
 
   XIX  INTRODUCTION 
 
The Ayurvedic system of medicine is prevalent in India since the  Vedic period and as early as the dawn of 
human civilization.  Though Ayurveda has undergone many changes in the cours e of its long history, it still 
remains the mainstay of medical relief to a large section of  the population of the nation. Due to urbanisaton and 
dwindling of forests, the Vaidya was no longer self sufficient in c ollecting and preparing his own medicines as 
before.  He had come to depend on outside agencies for collecting and supply ing the crude drugs be required. 
Others undertaking mass production of medicines in Ayurvedic Pharmaci es on commercial scale, took over the 
role of the Vaidya - Pharmacist also.  
 
 2. In view of the such trend in the Ayurvedic field Govt. of India cons idered it expedient to extend the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, to the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs to a limited measure.  
 
3. The Act was accordingly amended in 1964, to ensure only a limited control over the produc tion and sale 
of these medicines namely:- 
 
i. The manufacture should be carried under prescribed hygienic conditions , under the supervision of 
a person having  prescribed qualifications; 
 
ii. The raw materials used in the preparation of drugs should be genuine and properly identi fied; and  
 
iii. The formula or the true list of all the ingredients containe d in the drugs should be displayed on the 
label of every container. 
 
4. To start with, development of standards for the identity, purity and s trength of single drugs and 
formulations at a later stage, assumed importance for the effec tive enforcement of the provision of the Act. If the 
raw materials to be used in a medicine and stage-by-stage proce sses of manufacturers were standardised, the final 
product namely, the compound formulation could be expected to conform to uniform st andards. The requirements 
that the list of ingredients be displayed on the label will enable analysts in important cases to verify label claims 
and to that extent will bind the manufacture to a true claim. Arrang ements to evolve and lay down physical, 
chemical and biological tests, wherever necessary, to identify t he drugs and ascertain their quality and to detect 
adulterations are an urgent necessity of the profession. Setting up of Drug St andardisation Units, Research Centres, 
Drug Testing Institutes and Central Drug Laboratories for Ayurve dic Medicines both at the All-India and Regional 
levels for this purpose are therefore, essential. The several C ommittees appointed by the Government of India to 
assess and evaluate the status and practice of Ayurvedic Medici ne have stressed the importance of preparing an 
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia. 
 
5. Having regard to all these considerations, the Central Council of Ayurvedic Research recommended the 
constitution of Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee consisting of expert s on Ayurveda and other sciences. The 
Government of India accepted the recommendations of the Central Council  of Ayurvedic Research and constituted 
the First Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee, vide their letter  No. 14-8/62-ISM, dated the 20 th September, 1962 
for a period of three years with effect from the date of its f irst meeting under the Chairmanship of Col. Sir R.N. 
Chopra with the following member :- 
 
1. Col. Sir Ram Nath Chopra, Drugs Research Laboratory, Srinagar.              Chairman                    
 
2. Vaidya B.V. Gokhale, 29/14-15, Erandavane, Deccan Gymkhana, Poona-4.     Member 
 
3. Vaidya D.A. Kulkarni, Principal, Post Graduate, Training Centre in   Member   
    Ayurveda, Jamnagar. 
  XX  4. Kaviraj B.N. Sircar, 779-780, Nicholson Road, Kashmere Gate, Delhi-6. Member  
 
5. Shri A.N. Namjoshi, Navyug Mansion, 19-A, Sleater Road, Bombay-7. Member  
 
6. Dr. B.B.Gaitonde, Professor of Pharmacology, Grant Medical College,  Member   
    Bombay. 
 
7. Dr. C.G. Pandit, Director, Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi. Member   
 
8. Dr. G.K. Karandikar, Dean, Medical College, Aurangabad.      Member    
 
9. Dr. G.S. Pande, Honorary Director, Indian Drug Research Association, Member   
    955-Sadashiv Peth, Lakshmi Road, Poona-2. 
 
10.  Dr. M.V. Venkataraghava, Chellakoti, Nungabakkum, Madras-34.  Member  
 
11. Ayurvedachara Kaladi K. Parameswaran Pillai, Laksmivilasam   Member  
      Vaidyasala, Vanchiyur, Trivandrum. 
 
12. Dr. V. Narayanaswamy, 70, Tana Street, Vepeiy, Madras-7.    Member    
  
13. Vaidya P.V.Dhamankar Shastri, Pardeshi Lane, Panvel, District Kolaba, Member   
      Bombay. 
 
14. S.K. Borkar, Drug Controller (India), Directorate General of Health Service s, Member  
     Government of India, New Delhi. 
 
15. Shri Bapalal G.Vaidya, Principal, O.H. Nazar Ayurveda Mahavidyalaya, Member   
     Surat. 
 
16. Kumari Savita Satakopan, Drugs Control Laboratory,    Member  
      Near Polytechnic, National Highway 8, Baroda. 
 
17. Vaidya Vasudev M. Dwivedi, Director of Ayurveda,    Member   
      Government of Gujrat, Ahmedabad. 
 
18.  Shri P.V. Bhatt, M.Sc., Chemist, The Ayurvedic Rasashala,   Member 
       Deccan Gymkhana, Poona. 
 
19. Vaidya Ram Sushil Singh, Assistant Director of Ayurveda,    Member   
      Director of MedicalServices, (Ayurveda), Govt. of U.P. 
 
20. Dr.Y. Kondal Rao,Secretary,      Member   
      Indian Medical Practitioner’s Cooperative Pharmacy & Stores Limited,  
Adyar, Madras-20. 
21. Dr. V. Srinivasan, M.Sc., M.B.B.S., Ph.D., Director, Sarabhai  Member  
      Chemicals Research Institute, Shahibag, Ahmedabad-4.  
 
22. Dr. C. Dwarakanath, Adviser in Indian System of Medicine,   Member  Secretary 
     Ministry of Health, New Delhi.                                                                              
  XXI  The Committee was assigned the following functions :- 
 
1. To prepare an official Formulary in two parts :- 
 
(a) Single drugs, of whose identity and therapeutic value there is no doubt; and 
    
(b) Compound preparations, which are frequently used in Ayurvedic practice throughout the countr y. 
 
2. To provide standards for drug and medicines of therapeutic usefulness or  pharmaceutical necessity 
commonly used in Ayurvedic practice. 
 
3. To lay down tests for identity, quality and purity. 
 
4. To ensure as far as possible uniformity, physical properties and active constit uents; and  
 
5. To provide all other information regarding the distinguishing charact eristics, methods of preparation, 
dosage, method of administration with various anupanas or vehicles and their toxicity. 
 
As a first step in this direction the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Com mittee started preparing the official 
Formulary of Ayurveda in two parts as mentioned under the assigned func tions of the Committee. Since the work 
of preparation of Ayurvedic Formulary could not be completed the expiry of  first three years, the Government of 
India extended the term of the Committee by another three years, vi de their notification No. F. 20-1/66-RISM, 
dated 14th January, 1966 and again for a further period of three years vide  their notification No. F. 1-1/69-APC, 
dated 9th January, 1969.  During the years that followed, Ayuurvedic Formula ry Part-I and II and Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopoeia of India-Part-I, Volume I-V were published, the former containing the compound formulations 
from classical Ayurvedic texts prescribed in Schedule-I to the D rug and cosmetic Act and Cosmetics Act, and the 
latter, laying down standards for single drugs of plant origin. Amendme nt to the provisions introduced in 1982 
further strengthened the ASU    system by defining misbranded, adulterated and spurious drug s in the ASU system.  
 
Subsequently under the 10 th  Five Year Plan a project was initiated by the Department to deve lop Method of 
Preparation, Standard Operative Procedures, Pharmacopoeial Standards a nd Shelf Life of Compound formulations 
of Ayurveda appearing in Ayurvedic Formulary of India, Parts I & II.  
 
The work of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee was transferr ed along with some technical staff to 
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, New Delhi as a  secretariat for APC vide letter no. X-
19011/6/94-APC (AYUSH),            dated  29 th  March, 2006. 
 
Prof. A.N. Namjoshi ( 1972, 1981 , 1988  and 1994 ), Vaidya I. Sanjeeva Rao ( 1998 ) and Dr. P.D. Sethi 
(2001 ) were Chairmen of reconstituted Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee during the  specified periods.   
 
The present Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee (APC) was reconsti tuted under the Deptt. of  
AYUSH vide letter No.X-19011/6/94-APC (AYUSH) dated 9 st  March, 2006 consisting of following 
members.  
 
 
  XXII   
 Ms. Savita Satakopan, M.Sc. 
(Former Drug Analyst), 
Government of Gujarat, 
                 Seventh Street, 
Nanganallur, Chennai – 600 061. 
 Prof. S.S. Handa, M. Pharma, Ph.D., 
(Former Director, RRL, Jammu),  
522-A, Block ‘C’, 
Sushant Lok, Phase-I, 
Gurgaon, Haryana – 122 001.  
 
 Dr. S.K. Sharma, M.D. (Ayu.), Ph.D. 
Advisor (Ayurveda), 
Department of AYUSH, 
Red Cross Society Building, 
New Delhi – 110 001. Vice-Chairman 
 
OFFICIAL MEMBERS 
1.  Dr. G.S. Lavekar, AVP; Ph.D.  
Director, 
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha, 
61-65, Institutional Area, 
D-Block, Janakpuri, 
New Delhi – 110 058. 
 Member-Secretary  
(Ex-officio) 
 
2.  Dr. D.R. Lohar, M.Sc.; Ph.D. 
Director I/C, 
Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine, 
Central Govt. Offices Complex, 
Kamla Nehru Nagar, 
Ghaziabad – 201 002. 
 Member (Ex-officio) 
 
3.  Managing Director,  
Indian Medicines Pharmaceutical Corporation Ltd., 
Mohan, Via – Ram Nagar, 
Distt.- Almora, Uttranchal. 
 Member (Ex-officio) 
 
4.  Drugs Controller General (India),    
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,  
Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi – 110 011. 
 Member (Ex-officio) 
  XXIII  NON-OFFICIAL MEMBERS 
Phytochemistry & Chemistry Sub-Committee  
 
1.  Prof. V.K. Kapoor, M. Pharm., Ph.D. 
(Former Dean and Chairman, 
University Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Panjab University, Chandigarh) 
1473, Pushpac Complex, 49B,  
Chandigarh - 160 047. 
 Chairman 
2.  Prof. S.S. Handa, M. Pharm., Ph.D., 
(Former Director, RRL), 
522-A, Block ‘C’,  
Sushant Lok, Phase-I, 
Gurgaon, Haryana – 122 001. 
 Member 
3.  Dr. P.D. Sethi, M. Pharm., Ph.D., 
(Former Director Central Indian Pharmacopoeial 
Laboratory) 
B-140, Shivalik Enclave, 
New Delhi – 110 017. 
 Member 
4.  Shri J.K. Dhing, M.Sc. 
Former Chief Manager (Exploration), 
Hindustan Copper Ltd., SF-8, Sector-5, 
(Gayatri Nagar) Hiran Magri, 
Udaipur – 313 002. (Rajasthan). 
 Member 
Pharmacognosy Sub-Committee  
 
1.  Ms. S. Satakopan, M.Sc 
(Former Drug Analyst), 
 Government of Gujarat, 
7/4, Padmam Flats, Seventh Street, 
Nanganallur, Chennai – 600 061. 
 Chairman 
2.  Dr. (Mrs.) Shanta Mehrotra, M.Sc., Ph.D., 
Emeritus Scientist, 
National Botanical Research Institute, 
Rana Pratap Marg, P.B. No.-436, 
Lucknow – 226 001 (U.P.). 
 Member 
3.  Dr. M.A. Iyengar, M. Pharma, Ph.D, 
Prof. of Pharmacognosy (Retd.), 
14, HIG, HUDCO, Manipal – 576 119. Member  XXIV  4.  Dr. J. Mohanasundraram, M.D., 
Former Professor of Pharmacology 
& Deputy Director of Medical Education, 
Chennai. 
 Member 
Formulary Sub-Committee  
(Rasa Shastra / Bhaishajya Kalpana – Ayurvedic Pharmacy) 
 
1.  Prof. S.K. Dixit, A.B.M.S.; D.Ay.M; Ph.D. 
(Former Head, Deptt. of Rasa Shastra, BHU), 
B-3/402, Shivala, Varanasi  221 005 (UP.). 
 Chairman 
2.  Dr. B.L. Gaur, Ph.D.; 
Vice-Chancellor,  
Jodhpur Ayurvedic University,   
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, 
 
3.  Prof. Siddhinandan Mishra, G.B.M.S.; Ph.D. 
Pharmacy In-charge, SDM Ayurvedic College, 
P.O. Kuthpady, Udupi – 574 118,  
(South Karnataka). 
 Member 
4.  Prof. Ved Vrat Sharma, H.P.A. 
(Former Principal, DAV Ayurvedic College), 
House No. 65, Sector-8, Panchkula, Haryana. 
 Member 
5.  Dr. P.K. Prajapati, M.D. (Ay.), Ph. D., 
Reader & Head, Deptt. of Ras Shastra, 
IPGT & RA, Gujarat Ayurved University, 
Jamnagar, Gujarat – 361 008. 
 Member 
6.  Dr. Narendra Bhatt, M.D. (Ay.), 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd., 
70, Ghokhle Road (South), Dadar, 
Mumbai – 400 025. 
 Member 
7.  Shri Ranjit Puranik, 
General Manager, 
Shree Dhootapapeshwar Ltd., 
135, Nanubhai Desai Road, Khetwadi, 
Mumbai. 
 Member 
  XXV   
 
(Single Drugs of Plants, Minerals, Metals, Animal origin) 
 
1.  Prof. V.K. Joshi, M.D. (Ay.), Ph.D.  
Deptt. Dravyaguna, 
Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Banaras Hindu University (BHU), 
Varanasi – 221 005 (U.P.). 
 Chairman 
2.  Prof. K.C. Chunekar, Ph.D.  
(Former Reader, Deptt. of Dravyaguna, BHU), 
18/7, Ratan Phatak, 
Varanasi, (U.P.). 
 Member 
3.  Vaidya Devender Triguna, Ayurvedacharya,  
“PADAM SHREE”, 143-Sarai Kale Khan, 
Nizamuddin East, New Delhi. 
 Member 
4.  Dr. M.R. Uniyal, M.D. (Ay.), Ph.D. 
(Former Director, CRIA, CCRAS), 
Director (Drugs), Maharishi Ayurved Products, 
17/18, NOIDA Export Processing Zone, 
NOIDA – 201 305. 
 Member 
5.  Prof. V.V. Prasad, 
Director, 
Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, 
Dhanvantri Bhawan, 
Road No. 66, Punjabi Bagh (West), 
New Delhi – 110 026. 
 Member 
1.  Dr. G.V. Satyavathi, 
Former Director General-ICMR, 
Prasad-Nilaya, D-55/82, EAST-END (B), 
Main Road, 9 th  Block,  
Jaynagar, Bangalore –500069.  
2.  Dr. G.P. Dubey, 
Ex.Dean, Ayurveda, 
Project Investigator, 
Center of Psychosomatic & Biofeedback 
Medicine, Faculty of Ayurveda, 
Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi – 221 005.    XXVI  1. The term of the Committee shall be for a period of three years  from the date of its first meeting 
and the members shall hold office for that period. 
 
2. The Chairman of the APC shall have the powers to form sub-committe es whenever required and 
to co-opt experts from outside for such sub-committees. 
            The Committee shall have the power to frame procedures of functioning. 
            The functions of the Committee shall be as follows: 
(i)       To prepare  Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India of single and compound drugs. 
(ii) To prescribe the working standards for compound Ayurvedic formulations  including tests for 
identity, purity, strength and quality so as to ensure uniformity of the finished formulat ions. 
(iii) Keeping in view the time constraint, to identify such methods, procedures and plan of work as 
would enable to publish the formulary and standards of all commonly used drug s to be brought 
out in a phased manner. 
(iv) To prepare remaining parts of the official formulary of compound preparations from the classical 
texts including standardized composition of reputed institution. 
(v) To develop and standardize methods of preparations, dosage form, toxicity profile etc . 
(vi) To develop quality standards, safety, efficacy profile of inter mediates likes extracts of Ayurvedic 
raw drugs. 
(vii) To develop the quality standards, safety, efficacy profile of different parts of the plants; as well as 
to include new plants as Ayurvedic drugs. 
(viii) Any other matter relating to the quality standards, shelf life, identif ication, new formulations etc. 
 
3. The following are the targets focus of the Committee: 
(i) To evolve standards of single drugs mentioned in the Ayurvedic Formularies of India.  
(ii) To evolve standards for compound formulations mentioned in the Ayurvedic Formularies of India 
& other Ayurvedic formulations of National Priority. 
(iii) To prepare draft SOP of  formulations of Ayurvedic Formulari es of India from the classical texts 
and other authentic sources.  XXVII  CONTRIBUTING LABORATORIES & INSTITUTIONS 
 
The following institutions have carried out the scientific work of Monograp hs under APC scheme. 
 
 
Captain Srinivasa Murty Drug Research Institute Ayurveda (CSMDRIA), 
Aringner Anna Government Hospital Campus, 
Arumbakkam, 
Chennai  600 016.  
(P.I.-Dr. (Ms.) A. Saraswathy) 
  
 
B. V. Patel, Pharmaceutical Education, 
and Research Development (PERD) Centre,  
Thaltej, Ahmedabad  380 054.  
(P.I. - Dr. (Mrs.) M. Rajani) 
 
 
National Botanical Research Institute,  
(Council of Scientific & Industrial Research), 
Rana Pratap Marg,  
P. B. No. 436, Lucknow 226 00. 
(P.I. -Dr. A. K. S. Rawat) 
 
 
Indian Institute of Chemical Technology,  
(Council of Scientific & Industrial Research), 
Hyderabad 500 007. 
(P.I. - Dr. Vijaya Kumar) 
 
 
Institute of Minerals & Materials Technology 
(Formerly know as Regional Research Laboratory)  
Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, 
Bhubneshwar 751 013, Orissa. 
(P.I. - Dr. U. V. Mallavadhani) 
 
 
University Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Punjab University,  
Chandigrah 160 014. 
(P. I. - Dr. Karan Vasisht) 
 
 
 
  XXVIII  ABBREVIATIONS FOR PARTS OF PLANTS 
 
Exudate  EXD. 
Flower  FL. 
Fruit FR. 
Fruit Rind FR. RIND 
Heart Wood HT. WD. 
Leaf  LF. 
Leaf Base  LF. BASE 
Root Bark  RT. BK. 
Root  RT. 
Rhizome  RZ. 
Seed  SD. 
Stilt Root  STILT RT. 
Stem Bark  ST. BK. 
Stem  ST. 
Tuberous Root  TUB. RT. 
Whole Plant WH. PL. 
 
Indo – Romanic Equivalents of 
Devanagari Alphabets 
  
 +É  a      b ²² ²²a    
 +Éö  ¢¢ ¢¢                        f ²² ²²ha 
 <  I      hö ´´ ´´a 
 <Ç  ¤¤¤¤                        iö ta  
 =  u      lö tha  
 >  ¦¦ ¦¦                        n da  
 zö@  ¨¨ ¨¨                        v ö dha      
 A  a      x ö na  
 Aä  ai      {ö pa  
 +Éöä  o      {ÉE pha   
 +Éöè  au      ¤ö ba  
     Ä   ¼¼ ¼¼                        £ö bha  
    :  ªª ªª                        à ö ma  
     BÉE  ka      ªö ya  
            Jö  kha      ® ra  
  Mö  ga      š la  
 Pö  gha      ´ö va 
 R  ¬¬ ¬¬a      ¶ö ºº ººa  
 Sö  ca      −ö ¾¾ ¾¾a 
 U  cha      ºö sa  
 Vö  ja      c ha  
 Zö   jha      F ö k¾¾ ¾¾a 
 \ö   ®® ®®a      z ö tra  
 ]   °°°°a      Y ö j®® ®®a 
 ~   °°°°ha  
   
 
  XXIX   MONOGRAPHS PUBLISHED IN AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA OF INDIA 
PART-I, VOL.-I 
                       
1. Ajagandha (Sd.)    Cleome gynandra Linn.    
2. Ajamoda (Frt.)    Apium leptophyllum  (Pers.) F.V.M. ex Benth. 
3. Amalaki (Fr. Frt. Pulp)   Emblica officinalis  Gaertn.    
4. Amalaki (Drd. Frt.)    Emblica officinalis  Gaertn.    
5. Aragvadha (Frt. Pulp.)   Cassia fistula Linn.     
6. Arka (Rt.)     Calotropis procera  (Ait.) R. Br.   
7. Arka (Lf.)    Calotropis procera  (Ait.) R. Br.   
8. Asana (Ht.Wd.)    Pterocarpus marsupium Roxb.    
9. Ashoka (St. Bk.)    Saraca asoca (Rosc.) DC. Willd.    
10. Asvagandha (Rt.)    Withania somnifera Dunal.     
11. Asvattha (Bk.)    Ficus religiosa Linn.      
12. Atasi (Sd.)                 Linum usitatissimum Linn.    
13. Atibala (Rt.)    Abutilon indicum (Linn.) Sw.    
14. Ativisa (Rt.)    Aconitum heterophyllum Wall. ex Royle   
15. Babbula (St.Bk.)    Acacia nilotica (Linn.) Willd. ex Del. sp. 
 indica (Benth.) Brenan 
16. Bakuci (Frt.)    Psoralea corylifolia Linn.    
17. Bibhitaka (Frt.)    Terminalia belerica Roxb.     
18. Bilva (Frt. Pulp)    Aegle marmelos Corr.     
19. Candrasura (Sd.)    Lepidium sativum Linn.    
20. Citraka (Rt.)    Plumbago zeylanica  Linn.    
21. Dhanyaka  (Frt.)    Coriandrum sativum  Linn.    
22. Dhataki (Fl.)    Woodfordia fruticosa  (Linn.) Kurz.   
23. Eranda (Rt.)    Ricinus communis Linn.    
24. Gambhari (Rt. Bk.)    Gmelina arborea Roxb    
25. Goksura (Rt.)    Tribulus terrestris Linn.    
26. Goksura (Frt.)    Tribulus terrestris Linn.    
27. Guduci (St.)    Tinospora cordifolia  (Willd.) Miers.   
28. Guggulu (Exudate)    Commiphora wightii  (Arn.) Bhand.   
29. Gunja (Sd.)    Abrus precatorius Linn.    
30. Haridra (Rz.)    Curcuma longa Linn.      
31. Haritaki (Frt.)    Terminalia chebula  Retz.    
32. Hingu (Oleo-Gum-Resin)   Ferula foetida Regel.     
33. Jatamansi (Rz.)    Nardostachys jatamansi DC.     
34. Jatiphala (Sd.)    Myristica fragrans Houtt.     
35. Kampilla (Frt.)    Mallotus philippinensis Muell.-Arg.   
36. Kancanara (St. Bk.)   Bauhinia variegata Blume    
37. Kankola (Frt.)    Piper cubeba Linn. f.      
38. Kantakari (W.P.)    Solanum surattense Burm. f.     
39. Kanyasara (Lf.)    Aloe barbadensis Mill.    
40. Karanja (Sd.)    Pongamia pinnata  (Linn.) Merr.   
41. Karavira (Lf.)    Nerium indicum Mill.     
42. Karkatasrngi  (Gall)   Pistacia chinensis Burgo     
43. Karpasa (Sd.)    G ossypium herbaceum Linn.    
44. Kaseru (Rz.)    Scirpus kysoor Roxb.      
45. Ketaki (Rt.)    Pandanus tectorius Soland. ex Parkinson  
46. Khadira (Ht.Wd.)    Acacia catechu (Linn. f.) Willd.   
47. Kiratatikta (W.P.)    Swertia chirata Buch.-Ham.     XXX  48. Krsnajiraka (Frt.)    Carum carvi Linn.     
49. Kulattha (Sd.)    Vigna unquiculata (Linn.) Walp.   
50. Kustha (Rt.)    Saussurea lappa C.B. Clarke    
51. Kutaja (St. Bk.)    Holarrhena antidysenterica (Roth) A. DC.  
52. Lavanga (Fl. Bud)    Syzygium aromaticum (Linn.) Merr. & M.Perry 
53. Lodhra (St. Bk.)    Symplocos racemosa Roxb.    
54. Madana (Frt.)    Xeromphis spinosa (Thunb.) Keay    
55. Misreya (Frt.)    Foeniculum vulgare Mill.    
56. Nyagrodha (St. Bk.)   Ficus bengalensis Linn.    
57. Pasanabheda (Rz.)    Bergenia ciliata (Haw.) Sternb.   
58. Patha (Rt.)     Cissampelos pareira Linn.    
59. Puga (Sd.)     Areca catechu Linn.     
60. Punarnava (Rakta) (W.P.)   Boerhaavia diffusa Linn.    
61. Saptaparna (St. Bk.)   Alstonia scholaris (Linn.) R. Br.   
62. Sati (Rz.)    Hedychium spicatum Ham. ex Smith   
63. Snuhi (St.)     Euphorbia neriifolia Linn.    
64. Suksmaila (Frt.)   Elettaria cardamomum (Linn.) Maton  
65. Sunthi (Rz.)    Zingiber officinale Roxb.     
66. Svarnapatri (Lf.)    Cassia angustifolia Vahl.    
67. Svetajiraka (Frt.)    Cuminum cyminum Linn.    
68. Sveta Sariva (Rt.)    Hemidesmus indicus (Linn.) R. Br.   
69. Tagara (Rz.)    Valeriana wallichii DC.    
70. Tamalaki (Rt., St. & Lf.)   Phyllanthus fraternus Webst.     
71. Tvak (Bk.)     Cinnamomum zeylanicum Blume    
72. Tvakapatra (Lf.)    Cinnamomum tamala (Buch.-Ham.) Nees & Eberm. 
73. Udumbara (Bk.)   Ficus racemosa Linn.     
74. Upakuncika (Sd.)    Nigella sativa Linn.     
75. Varuna (St. Bk.)    Crataeva nurvala Buch.-Ham.   
76. Vasa (Lf.)     Adhatoda vasica Nees     
77. Vidanga (Frt.)    Embelia ribes Burm.f.     
78. Vijaya (Lf.)    Cannabis sativa Linn.     
79. Yasti (St. & Rt.)    Glycyrrhiza glabra Linn.    
80. Yavani (Frt.)    Trachyspermum ammi (Linn.) Sprague ex Turril 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  XXXI   
MONOGRAPHS PUBLISHED IN AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA OF INDIA  
PART-I, VOL. II  
 
       1.        Akarakarabha (Rt.)    Anacyclus pyrethrum DC.   
2. Aksoda (Cotldn.)    Juglans regia Linn.        
3. Amrata (St. Bk.)    Spondias pinnata  (Linn. f.) Kurz. 
4. Apamarga (W.P.)   Achyranthes aspera  Linn.       
5. Aparajita (Rt.)              Clitoria ternatea Linn.  
6. Ardraka (Rz.)     Zingiber officinale  Rosc.  
7. Arimeda (St.Bk.)   Acacia leucophloea Willd.         
8. Arjuna (St.Bk.)     Terminalia arjuna W.& A.  
9. Bhallataka (Frt.)    Semecarpus anacardium Linn.        
10. Bhrngaraja (W.P.)   Eclipta alba Hassk.          
11. Brahmi (W.P.)    Bacopa monnieri (Linn.) Wettst.        
12. Brhati (Rt.)     Solanum indicum Linn.    
13. Cavya (St.)     Piper retrofractum Vahl.   
14. Dadima (Sd.)   Punica granatum Linn.         
15. Daruharidra (St.)     Berberis aristata DC.   
16. Dronapuspi (W.P.)     Leucas cephalotes Spreng.  
17. Ervaru (Sd.)   Cucumis melo var. utilissimus Duthie & Fuller 
18. Gajapippali (Frt.)    Scindapsus officinalis Schoott.         
19. Gambhari (Frt.)    Gmelina arborea Roxb.        
20. Gangeru (St.Bk.)    Grewia tenax (Forsk.) Aschers & Schwf.    
21. Gunja (Rt.)    Abrus precatorius Linn.          
22. Iksu (St.)     Saccharum officinarum Linn.         
23. Indravaruni (Rt.)   Citrullus colocynthis Schrad.         
24. Indravaruni (Lf.)     Citrullus colocynthis Schrad.         
25. Jambu (Sd.)     Syzygium cuminii (Linn.) Skeels  
26. Jambu (St.Bk.)   Syzygium cuminii (Linn.) Skeels         
27. Jayapala (Sd.)    Croton tiglium Linn.          
28. Jayanti (Lf.)                Sesbania sesban (Linn.) Merr.         
29. Jyotismati (Sd.)    Celastrus paniculatus Willd.         
30. Kadamba (St.Bk.)         Anthocephalus cadamba Miq.          
31. Kakamaci (W.P.)    Solanum nigrum Linn.          
32. Kamala (Fl.)    Nelumbo nucifera Gaertn.          
33. Kapittha (Frt.Pulp)    Feronia limonia (Linn.) Swingle          
34. Karamarda (St.Bk.)    Carissa carandas Linn.          
35. Karanja (Rt.Bk.)            Pongamia pinnata (Linn.) Merr.         
36. Karanja (Rt.)    Pongamia pinnata (Linn.) Merr.         
37. Karanja (St.Bk.)    Pongamia pinnata (Linn.) Merr.         
38. Karanja (Lf.)     Pongamia pinnata (Linn.) Merr.         
39. Karavallaka (Fr. Frt.)  Momordica charantia  Linn.          
40. Katuka (Rz.)    Picrorhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth.   
41. Kokilaksa (W.P.)   Asteracantha longifolia Nees         
42. Kokilaksa (Rt.)     Asteracantha longifolia Nees         
43. Kokilaksa (Sd.)     Asteracantha longifolia Nees   
44. Kozuppa (W.P.)    Portulaca oleracea Linn.          
45. Lajjalu (W.P.)    Mimosa pudica Linn.            
46. Madhuka (Fl.)     Madhuca indica J.F. Gmel.            XXXII  47. Matsyaksi (W.P.)   Alternanthera sessilis (Linn.) R. Br.          
48. Methi (Sd.)     Trigonella foenum-graecum Linn. 
49. Mulaka (W.P.)     Raphanus sativus  Linn.            
50. Mulaka (Rt.)    Raphanus sativus  Linn.            
51. Mura (Rt.)                 Selinium candollei DC.            
52. Murva (Rt.)    Marsdenia tenacissima Wight. & Arn.          
53. Nagakesar (Stmn.)     Mesua ferrea Linn.            
54. Nili (Lf.)     Indigofera tinctoria Linn.            
55. Nili (Rt.)     Indigofera tinctoria Linn.            
56. Nimba (Lf.)    Azadirachta indica A. Juss.           
57. Nimba (St.Bk.)   Azadirachta indica A. Juss.            
58. Palasa (St.Bk.)     Butea monosperma  (Lam.) Kuntze   
59. Paribhadra (St.Bk.)    Erythrina indica Lam.            
60. Pippalimula (St.)    Piper longum Linn.            
61. Plaksa (St.Bk.)    Ficus lacor  Buch.-Ham.            
62. Prasarini (W.P.)    Paederia foetida Linn.            
63. Priyala (Sd.)    Buchanania lanzan  Spreng.           
64. Priyangu (Infl.)    Callicarpa macrophylla Vahl.           
65. Sali (Rt.)     Oryza sativa Linn.             
66. Sankhapuspi (W.P.)   Convolvulus pluricaulis Choisy           
67. Saptala (W.P.)   Euphorbia dracunculoides Lam.           
68. Satahva (Frt.)   Anethum sowa Roxb. ex Flem.            
69. Sigru (Lf.)      Moringa oleifera Lam.            
70. Sthulaela (Sd.)   Amomum subulatum Roxb.           
71. Tejovati (St.Bk.)     Zanthoxylum armatum DC.           
72. Tulasi (W.P.)     Ocimum sanctum Linn.            
73. Tulasi (Lf.)    Ocimum sanctum Linn.            
74. Vaca (Rz.)     Acorus calamus Linn.            
75. Vatsanabha (Rt.)   Aconitum chasmanthum Stapf ex Holmes  
76. Vidari (Tub.Rt.)   Pueraria tuberosa DC.            
77. Yava (Frt.)     Hordeum vulgare Linn.            
78. Yavasaka (W.P)   Alhagi pseudalhagi (Bieb.) Desv.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  XXXIII  PHARMACOPOEIAL MONOGRAPHS TO BE PUBLISHED IN AYURVEDIC PHA RMACOPOEIA OF 
INDIA PART-I, VOL.-III 
1. Adhaki (Rt.)    Cajanus cajan  (Linn.) Millsp. 
2. Agnimantha (Rt.)   Clerodendrum phlomidis  Linn. f. 
3. Ambasthaki (Rt.)   Hibiscus sabdariffa  Linn. 
4. Amra (Sd.)    Mangifera indica Linn. 
5. Amra (St. Bk.)    Mangifera indica  Linn. 
6. Amrata (St.)    Spondias pinnata  (Linn.f.) Kurz. 
7. Apamarga (Rt.)   Achyranthes aspera  Linn. 
8. Araluka (St. Bk.)   Ailanthus excelsa Roxb. 
9. Arka (St. Bk.)    Calotropis procera (Ait.) R. Br. 
10. Asana (St. Bk.)    Pterocarpus marsupium Roxb. 
11. Asthisamhrta (St.)   Cissus quadrangularis Linn. 
12. Atmagupta (Sd.)   Mucuna prurita  Hook. 
13. Bharangi (Rt.)    Clerodendrum serratum Linn. 
14. Bijapura (Frt.)    Citrus medica Linn. 
15. Bilva (Rt.)    Aegle marmelos  Corr. 
16. Bimbi (W.P.)    Coccinia indica W. & A. 
17. Cangeri (W.P.)    Oxalis corniculata  Linn. 
18. Cirabilva (Frt.)    Holoptelea integrifolia  Planch 
19. Danti (Rt.)    Baliospermum montanum  Muell-Arg. 
20. Dhattura (Sd.)    Datura metel  Linn. 
21. Draksa (Frt.)    Vitis vinifera  Linn. 
22. Durva (Rt.)    Cynodon dactylon  (Linn.) Pers. 
23. Eranda (Lf.)    Ricinus communis Linn. 
24. Eranda (Sd.)    Ricinus communis Linn. 
25. Gambhari (St.)    Gmelina arborea  Roxb. 
26. Gojihva (Aer. Pt.)   Onosma bracteatum  Wall. 
27. Granthiparni (Rt.)   Leonotis nepetaefolia  R. Br. 
28. Hamsapadi (W.P.)   Adiantum lunulatum  Burm 
29. Hapusa (Frt.)    Juniperus commun is Linn. 
30. Indravaruni (Frt.)   Citrullus colocynthis  Schrad.  
31. Indrayava (Sd.)   Holarrhena antidysenterica  Wall. 
32. Isvari (Rt.)    Aristolochia indica  Linn. 
33. Jati (Lf.)    Jasminum officinale  Linn. 
34. Kadali (Rz.)    Musa paradisiaca Linn. 
35. Kakajangha (Rt.)   Peristrophe bicalyculata  Linn. 
36. Kakanasika (Sd.)   Martynia annua  Linn. 
37. Kakoli (Tub. Rt.)   Lilium polyphyllum  D. Don 
38. Kamala (Rz.)    Nelumbo nucifera  Gaertn. 
39. Karavira (Rt.)    Nerium indicum  Mill. 
40. Karinkara (Rt.)    Carissa carandas  Linn. 
41. Kasa (Rt.)    Saccharum spontaneum  Linn. 
42. Katphala (Frt.)    Myrica esculenta Buch.-Ham. ex D. Don 
43. Katphala (St. Bk.)   Myrica esculenta  Buch.-Ham. ex D. Don 
44. Kola (Frt. Pulp)   Zizypus jujuba  Lam.  
45. Kola (St. Bk.)    Zizypus jujuba  Lam. 
46. Kosataki (W.P.)   Luffa acutangula  (Linn.) Roxb. 
47. Kumuda (Fl.)    Nymphaea alba  Linn. 
48. Kusa (Rt. St.)    Desmostachya bipinnata  Stapf. 
49. Langali (Rz.)    Gloriosa superba  Linn.  XXXIV  50. Lasuna (Bulb)    Allium sativum  Linn. 
51. Mahabala (Rt.)    Sida rhombifolia  Linn. 
52. Manjistha (St.)    Rubia cordifolia  Linn. 
53. Marica (Frt.)    Piper nigrum  Linn. 
54. Masaparni (W.P.)   Teramnus labialis  Spreng. 
55. Masura (Sd.)    Lens culinaris  Medic. 
56. Mudga (Sd.)    Phaseolus radiatus  Linn. 
57. Mulaka (Sd.)    Raphanus sativus  Linn. 
58. Munditika (Lf.)   Sphaeranthus indicus  Linn. 
59. Musta (Rz.)    Cyperus rotundus  Linn. 
60. Nagavalli (Lf.)    Piper betle Linn. 
61. Narikela (Endo.)   Cocos nucifera  Linn. 
62. Nicula (Frt.)    Barringtonia acutangula  (Linn.) Gaertn. 
63. Nili (W.P.)    Indigofera tinctoria  Linn. 
64. Nirgundi (Lf.)    Vitex negundo  Linn. 
65. Padmaka (Ht. Wd.)   Prunus cerasoides D. Don 
66. Patalai (Rt.)    Stereospermum suaveolens DC. 
67. Phalgu (Frt.)    Ficus hispida  Linn. 
68. Phalgu (Rt.)    Ficus hispida  Linn. 
69. Prapunnada (Sd.)   Cassia tora Linn. 
70. Raktacandana (Ht.Wd.)  Pterocarpus santalinus  Linn. 
71. Raktapunarnava (Rt.)   Boerhaavia diffusa  Linn. 
72. Ramasitalika (W. P.)   Amaranthus tricolor Linn.  
73. Rasna (Lf.)    Pluchea lanceolata Oliver & Hiem.  
74. Sahacara (W.P.)   Barleria prionitis  Linn. 
75. Sahadevi (W.P.)   Vernonia cinerea  Lees. 
76. Saileya (Lichen-‘Thallus’)  Parmelia perlata  (Huds.) Ach. 
77. Saka (Ht. Wd.)    Tectona grandis Linn. 
78. Sakhotaka (St. Bk.)   Streblus asper  Lour. 
79. Salaparni (Rt.)    Desmodium gangeticum DC. 
80. Sali (Frt.)    Oryza sativa  Linn. 
81. Salmali (St.Bk.)   Bombax ceiba Linn.   
82. Sana (Sd.)    Crotolaria juncea  Linn. 
83. Sara (Rt.)    Saccharum bengalense  Retz. 
84. Sarala (Ht. Wd.)   Pinus roxburghii  Sargent 
85. Sarala (Rt.)    Pinus roxburghii Sargent 
86. Sarsapa (Sd.)    Brassica campestris  Linn. 
87. Satapatrika (Fl.)   Rosa centifolia  Linn. 
88. Simsapa (Ht. Wd.)   Dalbergia sissoo  Roxb. 
89. Simsapa (St. Bk.)   Dalbergia sissoo  Roxb. 
90. Sirisa (St. Bk.)    Albizzia lebbeck  Benth.  
91. Sthauneya (Lf.)   Taxus baccata  Linn. 
92. Surana (Corm.)   Amorphophallus campanulatus (Roxb.) Bl. 
93. Svetacandana (Ht.Wd.)   Santalum album  Linn. 
94. Syonaka (Rt.)    Oroxylum indicum  Vent. 
95. Tala (Infl.)    Borassus flabellifer  Linn. 
96. Trivrta (Rt.)    Operculina turpethum  (Linn.) Silva Manso 
97. Tumbini (Frt.)    Lagenaria siceraria  (Mol.) Standl. 
98. Udambara (Frt.)   Ficus glomerata  Roxb. 
99. Usira (Rt.)    Vetiveria zizanioides (Linn.) Nash 
100. Utpala (Fl.)    Nymphaea stellata  Willd.  XXXV  MONOGRAPHS PUBLISHED IN AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA OF INDIA 
PART-I, VOL. – IV 
 
1. Adhaki (Sd.)    Cajanus cajan Linn.     
2. Agaru (Ht. Wd.)   Aquilaria agallocha Roxb.     
3. Aklari (Endm.)      Lodoicea maldivica Pers.     
4. Aparajita (Lf.)     Clitoria ternatea  Linn.     
5. Atmagupta (Rt.)   Mucuna prurita  Hook.     
6. Bilva (St. Bk.)    Aegle marmelos Corr.     
7. Champaka (Fl.)    Michelia champaca Linn.     
8. Cinca (Ft. Pl.)    Tamarindus indica Linn.     
9. Dadima (Fr. Fruit)   Punica granatum Linn.     
10. Dadima (Ft. Rind)   Punica granatum Linn.     
11. Dadima (Lf.)    Punica granatum Linn.     
12. Devadaru (Ht. Wd.)   Cedrus deodara  (Roxb.) Loud.    
13. Dhattura (W.P.)    Datura metel Linn.     
14. Durva (W.P.)    Cynodon dactylon  (Linn.)     
15. Gambhari (St. Bk.)   Gmelina arborea Linn.     
16. Iksu (Rt. Stock)    Saccharum officinarum Linn.    
17. Kadali (Fl.)    Musa paradisiaca Linn.     
18. Karcura (Rz.)    Curcuma zedoaria Rosc.     
19. Kasturilatika (Sd.)   Hibiscus abelmoschus Linn.    
20. Kataka (Sd.)    Strychnos potatorum Linn. f.    
21. Kharjura (Drd. Ft.)   Phoenix dactylifera Linn.     
22. Kharjura (Fr. Ft.)   Phoenix dactylifera Linn.     
23. Krsnasariva (Rt.)   Cryptolepis buchanani Roem. & Schult.   
24. Kunduru (Exud.)   Boswellia serrata Roxb.      
25. Kunkuma (Sty. & Stg.)   Crocus sativus Linn.      
26. Kusmanda (Ft.)    Benincasa hispida (Thunb.) Cogn.   
27. Madayanti (Lf.)    Lawsonia inermis Linn.     
28. Mahanimba (St. Bk.)   Melia azedarach Linn.      
29. Mandukaparni (W.P.)   Centella asiatica (Linn.) Urban     
30. Mayakku (Gall)    Quercus infectoria Oliv.    
31. Mudgaparni (W.P.)   Vigna trilobata (Linn.) Verdc.    
32. Munditika (W.P.)   Sphaeranthus indicus Linn.    
33. Nayagrodha Jata  (Ar. Rt.)   Ficus bengalensis Linn.     
34. Nimbu (Fr. Ft.)    Citrus limon (Linn.) Burm. f.     
35. Nirgundi (Rt.)     Vitex negundo Linn.     
36. Palasa (Fl.)    Butea monosperma (Lam.) Kuntze.    
37. Palasa (Gum)    Butea monosperma (Lam.) Kuntze.    
38. Palasa (Sd.)    Butea monosperma (Lam.) Kuntze.    
39. Parpata (W.P.)    Fumaria parviflora Lam.     
40. Patalai (St. Bk.)    Stereospermum chelonoides (L.F.)DC.   
41. Pattanga (Ht. Wd.)   Caesaplinia sappan Linn.     
42. Pippali (Ft.)    Piper longum Linn.     
43. Plaksa (Ft.)    Ficus lacor Buch . – Ham.     
44. Priyala (St. Bk.)    Buchanania lanzan Spreng.    
45. Priyangu (Fruit)    Callicarpa macrophylla Vahl.    
46. Prsniparni (W.P.)   Uraria picta Desv.      
47. Puskara (Rt.)     Inula racemosa Hook. f.     XXXVI  48. Rudraksa (Sd.)    Elaeocarpus sphaericus Gaertn. K. Schum  
49. Saraja (Exud.)     Vateria indica Linn.     
50. Satavari (Rt.)    Asparagus recemosus Willd.    
51. Sigru (Rt. Bk.)    Moringa oleifera Lam.      
52. Sigru (Sd.)    Moringa oleifera Lam.      
53. Sigru (St. Bk)    Moringa oleifera Lam.     
54. Srngataka (Drd.Sd)   Trapa natans Linn.      
55. Sruvavrksa (Lf.)   Flacourtia indica Merr.     
56. Sruvavrksa (St. Bk)   Flacourtia indica Merr.     
57. Talamuli (Rz.)    Curculigo orchioides Gaertn.    
58. Talisa (Drd. Lf.)   Abies webbiana Lindl.     
59. Tila (Sd.)    Sesamum indicum Linn.      
60. Tulasi (Sd.)    Ocimum sanctum Linn.     
61. Tumburu (Ft.)    Zanthoxylum armatum DC.     
62. Utingana (Sd.)    Blepharis persica (Burm.f.) O. Kuntze.    
63. Varahi (Rz.)    Dioscorea bulbifera Linn.     
64. Varsabhu (Rt.)    Trianthema portulacastrum Linn.    
65. Vasa (Rt.)    Adhatoda zeylanica Medic.    
66. Visamusti (Sd.)    Strychnos nux-vomica Linn.    
67. Vrscikalli (W.P.)   Tragia involucrata Linn.  
68. Yava (W.P.)    Hordeum vulgare Linn.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  XXXVII  PHARMACOPOEIAL MONOGRAPHS TO BE PUBLISHED IN AYURVEDIC 
PHARMACOPOEIA OF INDIA PART-I, VOL.-V 
 
1. Amra Haridra (Rz.)   Curcuma amada Roxb.  
2. Anisoon (Fr.)   Pimpinelia anisum Linn.  
3. Ankola (Lf.)   Alangium  salviifolium (Linn.f.) Wang.  
4. Aragvadha (St.Bk.)   Cassia fistula Linn.  
5. Asphota (Rt.)   Vallaris solanacea Kuntze  
6. Bastantri (Rt.)   Argyreia nervosa (Burm.f.) Boj.  
7. Bhurja (St.Bk.)   Betula utilis D.Don  
8. Canda (Rt.)   Angelica archangelica Linn.  
9. Coraka (Rt. &Rt.Stock)   Angelica glauca Edgw.  
10. Darbha (Rt.)   Imperata cylindrica (Linn.) Beauv.  
11. Dhanvayasa (Wh.Pl.)   Fagonia cretica Linn.  
12. Dravanti (Sd.)   Jatropha glandulifera Roxb.  
13. Dugdhika (Wh.Pl.)   Euphorbia prostrata W. Ait.  
14. Elavaluka (Sd.)   Prunus avium Linn.f.  
15. Gandira (Rt.)   Coleus forskohlii Briq.  
16. Gavedhuka (Rt.)   Coix lachryma-jobi Linn.  
17. Ghonta (Fr.)   Ziziphus xylopyrus Willd.  
18. Gundrah (Rz. & Rt.)   Typha australis Schum. and Thonn.  
19. Himsra (Rt.)   Capparis spinosa Linn.  
20. Hingupatri (Lf.)   Ferula jaeschkeana Vatke  
21. Itkata (Rt.)   Sesbania bispinosa W.F.Wight  
22. Itkata (St.)   Sesbania bispinosa W.F.Wight  
23. Jalpippalika (Wh.Pl.)   Phyla nodiflora Greene  
24. Jivak (Pseudo-bulb)   Malaxis acuminata D.Don  
25. Kadara (Ht. Wd.)   Acacia suma Buch.-Ham.   
26.Kakajangha (Sd.)   Peristrophe bicalyculata (Retz.) Nees  
27. Kakanaja (Fr.)   Physalis alkekengi Linn.  
28. Kapitan (St.Bk.)   Thespesia populnea (L.) Soland. ex Correa  
29. Karkash (Rt.)   Momordica dioica Roxb. ex Willd.  
30. Karnasphota (Sd.)   Cardiospermum halicacabum Linn.  
31. Karnasphota (Rt.)   Cardiospermum halicacabum Linn.  
32. Kattrna (Wh.Pl.)   Cymbopogon citratus (DC.) Stapf  
33. Kebuka (Rz.)   Costus speciosus (Koerning ex Retz.) Smith.  
34. Khaskhas (Sd.)   Papaver somniferum Linn.  
35. Khatmi (Rt.)   Althaea officinalis Linn.  
36. Khatmi (Sd.)   Althaea officinalis Linn.  
37. Khubkalan (Sd.)   Sisymbrium irio Linn.  
38. Kodrava (Grain)   Paspalum scrobiculatum Linn.  
39. Ksirakakoli (Bulb)   Fritillaria roylei Hook.   
40. Kshiravidari (Rt.)   Ipomoea digitata Linn.  
41. Kulanjan (Rz.)   Alpinia galanga Willd.  
42. Kumbhikah (Sd.)   Careya arborea Roxb.  
43. Latakaranja (Sd.)   Caesalpinia bonduc (Linn.) Roxb.  
44. Lavaliphala (Fr.)   Phyllanthus acidus (Linn.) Skeels  
45. Madhulika (Rt.)   Eleusine corocana (L.) Gaertn.  
46. Mahameda (Rz.&Rt.)   Polygonatum cirrhifolium Royle  
47. Mahdusnuhi (Tub.Rt.)   Smilax china Linn.  
48. Maramanjal (Rt. & St.)   Coscinium fenestratum (Gaertn.) Colebr.   XXXVIII  49. Medasakah (St.Bk.)   Litsea chinensis Lam.  
50. Medasakah (Wd.)   Litsea chinensis Lam.  
51. Mesasrngi (Lf.)   Gymnema sylvestre R.Br.  
52. Mesasrngi (Rt.)   Gymnema sylvestre R.Br.  
53. Nandi (Rt.)   Ficus arnottiana Miq.  
54. Nilajhintika (Rt.)   Barleria strigosa Willd.  
55. Nimba (Rt.Bk.)   Azadirachta indica A.Juss.  
56. Nimba (Fl.)   Azadirachta indica A.Juss.  
57. Nimba (Fr.)   Azadirachta indica A.Juss.  
58. Palas (Sd.)   Butea monosperma (Lam.) Kuntze  
59. Palas (Fl.)   Butea monosperma (Lam.) Kuntze  
60. Parasikayavani (Sd.)   Hyoscyamus niger Linn.  
61. Pattura (Wh.Pl.)   Aerva lanata (Linn.) Juss.  
62. Pilu (Fr.)   Salvadora persica Linn.  
63. Pilu (Lf.)   Salvadora persica Linn.  
64. Pilu (Rt.Bk.)   Salvadora persica Linn.  
65. Potagala (Rt.)   Typha elephantina Roxb.  
66. Pudina (Aerial Part)   Mentha viridis Linn.  
67. Pullani (Lf.)   Calycopteris floribunda Lam.  
68. Pullani (Rt.)   Calycopteris floribunda Lam.  
69. Pullani (St.)   Calycopteris floribunda Lam.  
70. Putikaranjah (St.Bk.)   Caesalpinia crista Linn.  
71. Renuka (Fr.)   Vitex negundo Linn.  
72. Riddhi (Tuber)   Habenaria intermedia D.Don  
73. Rohisa (Wh.Pl.)   Cymbopogon martinii (Roxb.) Wats  
74. Rumimustagi (Resin)   Pistacia lentiscus Linn.  
75. Sarala (Exudate)   Pinus roxburghii Sargent  
76. Sarpagandha (Rt.)   Rauwolfia serpentina (Linn.) Benth. ex Kurz  
77. Svetapunarnava (Rt.)   Boerhaavia verticillata Poir.  
78. Tailaparna (Lf.)   Eucalyptus globulus Labill.  
79. Tinisha (Wd.)   Ougeinia oojeinensis (Roxb.) Hochr.  
80. Tintidika (Aerial Part)   Rhus  parviflora  Roxb.  
81. Trapusa (Sd.)   Cucumis sativus Linn.  
82. Tuni (St.Bk.)   Cedrela toona Roxb.  
83. Vanda (Lf.)   Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh.   
84. Vanda (St.)   Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh.  
85. Vanda (Aerial Rt.)   Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh.  
86. Vanda (Fl.)   Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh.  
87. Vanda (Fr.)   Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh.  
88. Vanyajiraka (Fr.)   Centratherum anthelminticum (L.) Kuntze  
89. Vidarikand (Tuber)   Pueraria tuberosa DC.  
90. Virala (St.Bk.)   Diospyros exsculpta Buch.-Ham.  
91. Visala (Rt.)   Trichosanthes bracteata (Lam.) Voigt  
92. Vyaghranakhi (Fr.)   Capparis horrida Linn.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  XXXIX   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MONOGRAPHS 
 
 
 
 
  XL   
ĀDĀRĪ (Leaf) 
 
 ¡d¢r¤ consists of dried tender leaves of Acacia pennata  (L.) Willd. Syn. Mimosa  pennata  L. (Fam. 
Mimosaceae), a large thorny climbing shrub distributed throughout India. 
    
SYNONYMS –  Khadiravall ¤, Āri 
 
REGIONAL  LANGUAGE  NAMES- 
 
Ben.          :      Kuchai 
Guj.          :      Khervelya 
Hin.          :      Biswal, Latakhadira, Aazi Khair 
Kan.          :      Siguri 
Mar.          :      Aarai velyakhera 
Ori.          :      Potadontari 
Tam.          :      Iya kozhundu 
Tel.          :      Karusakaya 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
a) Macroscopic:  
Bulk colour yellowish green or green; leaves bipinnately compound; peti ole 2 cm long, with a plate shaped 
gland near the middle or the base; rachis grooved, obscurely prickled, with glands opposite to two uppermost pairs 
of pinnae; leaflets 4 to 8 mm long and 1 mm broad, linear to oblong, tip ac ute, base truncate, glabrous, margin 
ciliate, veins obscure, midrib slightly prominent and very close to the distal mar gin; no odour or taste. 
 
b) Microscopic:   
  
 Rachis  -Epidermis a single layer of rectangular cells; cortex of 5 to 8 layers  of angular parenchyma, followed by a 
ring of sclerenchyma with 3 to 4 layers of cells, continuous except on the abaxial side, where a larger patch of 
sclerenchyma is found:  four vascular bundles present around a small pi th; xylem vessels angular; pith cells 
parenchymatous with starch grains having a central hilum. 
 
Leaflet  -Dorsiventral; in surface view, epidermal cells slightly sinuous  and thin walled, cuticle present; upper 
epidermis a single layer of polygonal cells; palisade tissue 2 or 3 layers; spongy mesophyll consists of irregular 
polyhedral cells with interspaces; midrib shows a slight projecti on; vascular bundle almost circular in outline and 
encircled with a sclerenchymatous sheath; in between vascular bundle  and lower epidermis, is a patch of 2 or 3 
layers of parenchyma..  
 
Powder - Greyish to yellowish green, polygonal cells of epidermis with paracytic stom ata; sclerenchymatous fibres 
of about 20 µ width; starch grains of 18 to 21 µ across with a central hilum; pitted, scalariform and spiral vessels.  
 
 
 
  XLI  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
Foreign matter   -      Not more than 2  per cent,     Appendix  2.2.2 
Total ash      -      Not more than 7  per cent ,     Appendix  2.2.3 
Sulphated ash              -      Not more than 11 per cent,    Appendix  2.2.6   
Acid-insoluble ash   -      Not more than 1  per cent,     Appendix  2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  -      Not less than   8  per cent,     Appendix  2.2.6 
Water- soluble extractive   -      Not less than 18  per cent,     Appendix  2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. - 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate  (0.2 mm thick) using é-hexane: ethyl 
acetate: methanol  (2:7:1) as mobile phase, after spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid  reagent and heating at 
105 o for 5 minutes  shows spots at R f. 0.07 (light pink), 0.22 (yellow), 0.26 (light violet), 0.33 (orange), 0.43 (light 
pink), 0.53 (light pink), 0.62 (yellow), 0.75 (light violet), 0.87 (pale yellow), 0.88 (grey), 0.91 (orange) and 0.95 
(pink). 
 
CONSTITUENTS- Octadecadienoic, octadecanoic, palmitic and pentadecanoic acids; lupeol, α-spinasterol, β-
sitosterol and tannins.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa   : Ka ¾¢ ya, Ka °u, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a  : Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤r ¤r ¤r ¤r ya  : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : K¢sahara, Pitta º¢ maka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Eravati, Vall ¤khadiragu ´a¢ª , Ārigu ´¢ª  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES – Jvara (Fever), R ¢ktado ¾a (Disorder of blood), Agnim ¢ndyan (Digestive impairment) 
DOSE- C ¦r´a (Powder) :  3 to 6 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  XLII  ¡MRAGANDHI-GUGGULU (Leaf) 
 
 ¡mragandhi-guggulu consists of leaves of Balsamodendron caudata  Mauch. Syn. Commiphora caudata 
Engl., Protium caudatum  W. & A.  (Fam. Burseraceae), a handsome deciduous, armed, small tre e with thick trunk 
and papery bark occurring in dry forests in the region of the Eastern Ghats, mostly in pla ins. 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass. :    Devadhup 
Kan. :    Kundamaavu, Kaimaavu 
Mal. :    Kilimarum 
Tam. :    Cenkiluvai Ilai  
Tel. :    Kondamamidi 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
Leaves compound, borne on grooved rachis, imparipinnate, leaflets 2 to 5 pair s, glabrous, ovate or 
orbiculate, entire, acuminate, unequal at base, nerves finely reticul ate, greenish brown; no characteristic smell, taste 
slightly resinous. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Rachis - Cross section grooved in outline; epidermis single layered; cuticl e present; a cortex of 6 or 7 layers of 
thick walled parenchyma cells present; the innermost layer of t he cortex consists of larger cells in a continuous 
row, similar to an endodermis; two or 3 wavy layers of sclerenchy matous pericycle present; stele lobed  in the 
phloem region, with a single resin canal beneath each lobe;  phloem and phloem parenchyma present in a 
continuous wavy ring, followed by xylem ring with vessel groups alter nating with xylem parenchyma; vessels 
large in size; pith parenchymatous; abundant druses, and scattered minut e starch grains present in the cortical, 
phloem and pith regions. 
 
Petiole -  Cross section grooved in outline; epidermis single layered; cutic le present; cortical region many layered, 
with thick walled parenchyma; a sinuous, discontinuous sclerenchymatous ba nd present; stele lobed; large resin 
canals present in the phloem; xylem in groups beneath resin canals in the lobe; pith parenchymatous; druses and 
starch grains present in cortex, phloem and pith. 
 
Midrib – TS shows bulge on the adaxial side, concave curvature on the abaxial si de; epidermis single layered with 
thick cuticle; sub-epidermal layers collenchymatous on both adaxial a nd abaxial sides; ground tissue 
parenchymatous; a shallow arc of vascular bundle present in the cente r; phloem present outside the xylem; facing 
the central arc a core of xylem surrounded by phloem present on adaxial side below the bulge; resin canals present; 
one beneath and two lateral to the vascular bundle; druses present throughout the tissues. 
 
Lamina  – Dorsiventral; epidermis single layered with larger cells and thicker cuticle on the adaxial side than on the 
abaxial side; in surface view upper epidermal cells with almost  straight walls, lower with distinctly wavy walls; 
stomata anomocytic; stomatal number 32 to 40 / mm 2; stomatal index 26 to 28; palisade ratio 6 to 8; vein-islet 
number 3 to 5; veinlet termination number 28 to 32. 
  XLIII  Powder - Greenish brown; no characteristic smell; a slight resinous tast e; druses of calcium oxalate crystals of 
about 25 µ, starch grains upto 10 µ, vessels scalariform, pitted and re ticulate, phloem fibres 200 µ to 1100 µ from 
the rachis. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITYAND STRENGTH - 
 
Foreign matter                 -  Not more than     1    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.2 
Total ash      - Not more than     9    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash     - Not more than     3    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive      - Not less   than     6    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive   - Not less   than   13    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.7 
Fixed oil     - Not less   than     2    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
 T.L.C. of methanolic extract on aluminium plate precoated with silica  gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  of 0.2 mm thickness 
using toluene: ethyl acetate  (9:1) under UV 366 nm shows fluorescent zones appearing at R f. 0.14(violet), 0.16 
(pink), 0.20 (violet), 0.57, 0.60 (both pink), 0.67 (deep violet), 0.75 (pink) and 0.83 (deep viol et). On dipping the 
plate in vanillin-sulphuric acid reagent  and heating at 105º for 5 minutes, 12 spots appear at R f. 0.12 (blue), 0.24 
(violet), 0.29 (pink), 0.33 (blue), 0.37 (pale violet), 0.51, 0.57, 0.60 (violet), 0.75 (pale violet) and 0.83 (green). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Gugulsterones 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION- 
 
Rasa :     Tikta, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a :     Laghu, Snigdha, Vi ºada, S ¦k¾ma, Sara, Sugandhi 
V¤¤¤¤rya :     U ¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka :     Ka °u  
Karma :     H ¨dya, Pratid ¦¾aka, Kapha-v¢tahara, Vra ´aropa ´a, Vra ´aºodha na 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug  
THERAPEUTIC USES - ¡mav ¢ta (Rheumatism), A ¬gamarda (Body ache), Ga ´² am ¢l¢ 
(Cerivical lymphadenitis ), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of skin), P ¢dadari (Chaffed / cracked 
soles / rhagades), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Sandhi ºotha (Arthritis), ¹otha (Inflammation), 
V¢tarakta (Gout), V ¢taroga (Disease due to Vata dosa), Visarpa (Erysepales), Vra ´a (Ulcer) 
 
DOSE – Svarasa (Juice) : 5 to 10 ml. 
 
 
 
 
  XLIV  ARA ³³ ³³YA -- --S¥¥ ¥¥RA ³³ ³³A (Tuber) 
 
 Ara ´ya-s¦ra ´a consists of dried tuber  of Synantherias sylvatica Schott Gen. Aocja  Syn.  Amorphophallus 
sylvaticus (Roxb.) Kunth (Fam. Araceae), a perennial, tuberous herb with a small, s ub-globose, smooth rhizome 
and a barred spathe, streaked with green and light pink. The plant is usually found along fores t borders in the states 
of Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka. 
 
SYNONYMS-  Vajrakanda, Sitas ¦ra ´a 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
Ben. :   Ola-kochu 
Guj. :   Godasurana 
Hin. :   Vanasurana 
Mal. :   Jangali-Ola 
Tam. :   Kattu-Karunaikizhanagu 
Tel. :   Mancha Kanda 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
a) Macroscopic: 
 Unpeeled  tuber sub-globose, depressed, bulbiferous, dark greyish-brown, warty, 18 to 25 cm  in thickness, 
whole or may be cut vertically and horizontally into transverse s lices of 2 to 3 cm size; rootlets a few, thin; texture 
starchy; odour not distinctive; taste, acrid. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
A section through the tuber reveals an outer tegumentary tissue com prising a few layers of thin walled 
cork, irregular and peeled off at places; cortex massive, consist ing of thin walled parenchyma abundant in starch 
grains; a zone of 2 or 3 layers of clear, angular, thin walled cells runs pericl inally in outer region of cortex; calcium 
oxalate crystals also found in the form of raphide bundles; starch gra ins without striations, single or compound, 
hilum linear; simple grains spherical, ovoid or sub-reniform; compound ones  usually comprising up to 6 units, 
polyhedral or sub- spherical; abundant in tissues surrounding the small, sc attered vascular bundles; vascular 
bundles scattered in cortex, running straight or in oblique fashion, comprisi ng the smaller as well as larger bundles 
towards the centre; xylem composed of a few vessels with spiral  thickenings, and xylem parenchyma; phloem 
consists of sieve tubes and companion cells. 
 
Powder – Dull creamish, fine; powder microscopy shows raphides 150 µ long; simple and compound starch 
grains, 2 to 6 membered and usually up to 50 µ in size, and occasionally; vessel fragments with spiral thickenings. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
Foreign matter                - Not more than 1   per cent,    Appendix  2.2.2 
Total ash   - Not more than 8   per cent,    Appendix  2.2.3 
Acid- insoluble ash   - Not more than 2   per cent,    Appendix  2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than   4   per cent,    Appendix  2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than 14   per cent,    Appendix  2.2.7 
  XLV  T.L.C – 
 T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on silica gel ‘G’ 60  F 254  using mobile phase     n-hexane: ethyl 
acetate : (7:3) shows  spots at R f. 0.17 (blue), 0.28 (Violet), 0.37 (dark violet) and 0.40 (dark violet) on spraying the 
plate with anisaldehyde- sulphuric acid reagent   and heating it for 15 minutes at 105 o. 
 
CONSTITUENTS- No report on the chemical constituents of the tuber is available in literature.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
    
Rasa   : Ka °u, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´a   : R¦k¾a, T ¤k¾´ a 
V¤¤¤¤rya  : U¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka  : Ka °u 
Karma  : K¨mighna, Ar ºoghna, R ¦cya, Vedan ¢hara 
 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - Granthi ºotha, (Arbuda (Tumor), Vicarcik ¢ (Eczema), Udararoga 
(Diseases of abdomen), ¹l¤pada (Filariasis), Ar ºa (Piles) 
  
DOSE – C¦r´a (Powder) : 5 to 10 g after ¹odhana. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  XLVI  ¡¡ ¡¡R¡¡ ¡¡RO ¯¯ ¯¯A (Rhizome) 
 ¡r¢ro °a is the dried rhizomes of Maranta arundinacea L. (Fam. Marantaceae), a rhizomatous herb of about 
75 cm in height, cultivated in India and also often found in wild, as an escape. 
 
SYNONYMS - Sita tavak ¾¤ra 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
Ben. :   Ararut 
Eng. :   West Indian Arrowroot 
Hin. :   Araaruta 
Kan. :   Araaruta 
Mar :   Tavakira 
Ori. :   Araaruta 
Pun. :   Araaruta 
Tam. :   Aruruttukkilangu 
Tel. :   Palagunda 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
a) Macroscopic: 
            Rhizome- horizontal and unbranched, spindle shaped, 12 to 20 cm long and dull white to creamy  in colour 
when fresh, prominently marked with nodal rings and scale leaves whi ch completely encircle the nodes; internodal 
length is 0.5 to 1.5 cm; sliced individual pieces are cylindrical, roug h, and size ranges from 1 to 2 cm long and 1 to 
2.5 cm across; externally brownish and broken surface off-white; frac ture, hard and fractured surface fibrous and 
starchy; starchy odour and taste. 
 
b) Microscopic:   
 
TS circular in outline, epidermis a single layer of small polyg onal cells, followed by a wide cortex of large 
polygonal cells with interspaces; medullary vascular bundles many, of various sizes and scattered in the cortical 
region;  each vascular bundle encircled by a semilunar bundle sheath of  sclerenchymatous cells, and consists of a 
small phloem patch and xylem with 1 to 6 vessels; stele consists of compactly arranged smaller vascular bundles 
towards endodermis and larger ones in the centre, embedded in the ground ti ssue of parenchymatous cells;  starch 
grains present in parenchymatous cells; irregularly ovoid, or pear shaped, ranging between 20 to 40 µ, some even 
upto 75 µ,  occasionally, concentric striations seen, with an eccentric stellate hilum.  
 
Powder- Creamy, starchy, under microscope shows compact polygonal parenchyma, spi ral, scalariform and 
annular vessels; elongated spindle shaped fibres of 15 to 20 µ width; starch grains circular, oval or pear shaped 
with a diameter of 20 to 40 µ, occasionally even upto 75 µ, with concentric striations and a central or lateral, linear 
or crossed hilum. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter                - Not more than 2 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash    - Not more than 5 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Sulphated ash               - Not more than 7 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Acid-insoluble ash  - Not more than 1 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than   1 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than 12 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.8  XLVII   
T.L.C.-  
 T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plat e (0.2 mm thick) using n-hexane: 
chloroform: methanol (26:13:1) as mobile phase,  after spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and 
heating at 105 0  for 5 minutes  shows spots at R f 0.27 (light violet), 0.53 (light violet), 0.68 (pink), 0.77 (pink), and 
0.85 (pink). 
 
CONSTITUENTS  - Starch (25-30%), dextrin and sugars. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
Rasa :     Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a :     Guru, Snigdha 
V¤¤¤¤rya :     ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka :     Madhura 
Karma :     Pittahara, Balya, V ¨¾ ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- K¢sa (Cough), ¹v¢sa (Asthama), D ¢ha (Burning sensation), T ¨¾´¢ 
(Thirst), K ¾aya (Pthisis), Agnim ¢ndya (Digestive impairment), Raktado ¾a (Disorder of blood) 
 
DOSE- C¦r´a (Powder): 5 to 10 g daily.  XLVIII  ASTHI ¹¹ ¹¹§« §« §« §« KHAL ¡¡ ¡¡ (Aerial Part) 
 
 Asthi º¨ ¬khal ¢ consists of dried aerial parts of Cissus quadrangularis L. (Fam.Vitaceae), a fleshy climber 
with jointed stem and leaf opposed tendrils growing along hedges and dist ributed throughout the hotter parts of 
India.  
 
SYNONYMS –  Asthisamh ¨ta, Vajravall ¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES -  
 
Ben. :    Haadjodaa 
Eng. :    Bone setter  
Guj. :    Haadsaankal 
Hin. :    Hadjoda  
Kan. :    Mangarvallee 
Mal. :    Piranta 
Mar. :    Kaandvel 
Ori. :    Haadabhanga gachha 
Pun. :    Hadajoda 
Tam. :    Pirandai 
Tel. :    Nalleru, Nallerutige 
Urd. :    Harjora 
 
DESCRIPTION –  
 
a) Macroscopic:  
 
 Stem pieces sub-quadrangular, flattened, winged and jointed, having constr icted nodes and spindle shaped 
internodes; smooth, shiny, dull green or grayish brown when old; branches dichot omous; leaves alternate, cauline, 
cordate; ovate, exstipulate, soft, thick, shiny and shortly petioled; te ndril brittle, long, slender, twisted, simple, 
arising at nodes opposite the leaves. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
 Stem shows a flattened, 4 – angled, almost dumb bell shaped outline with one or two notc hes on each side; 
four angles of the stem appear blunt in cross section with a scler enchymatous patch immediately below the 
epidermis in each corner; epidermis consists of a single layer of polygonal or slightly elongated cells with straight 
anticlinal walls and convex periclinal walls covered over by thic k cuticle; in surface view, epidermal cells divided 
into groups of 3 to 8 due to thickened anticlinal walls; stomata uniform ly distributed, anomocytic; ground tissue 
demarcated into an outer cortex and a central pith by a ring of vasc ular bundles; cortex made up of more or less 
compactly arranged, thin walled parenchymatous cells some of which c ontain crystals of calcium oxalate in the 
form of druses upto 25 µ dia., as well as raphides; some idioblasts st ain red with Ruthenium Red indicating the 
presence of some mucilage in them; circular cavities present sporadically; vascular bundles conjoint, collateral, 
open, endarch; those under the angles of the stem larger in size and num ber; bundles contain a peripheral patch of 
sclerenchyma cells followed by, phloem elements, phellogen and xylem e lements; vessels possess annular and 
spiral thickenings; a peripheral patch of collenchymatous cells is  also associated with a group of vascular bundles; 
pith is composed of thin walled loosely arranged parenchymatous cells;  some cells contain druses and  raphides;  XLIX  cavities, larger and much more abundant than those in the cortex present ; transverse section of tendril has 
prominent semi-barrel shaped epidermal cells covered by a cuticle having f ine striations, as seen in surface view of 
the epidermis with cuticle.  
 
Leaf – 
 
Midrib -Keeled on adaxial side, convexly rounded on the abaxial side; ground tissue parenchymatous, thin-walled 
cells, those in periphery containing chloroplasts; a small patch of s clerenchyma and below this a group of 
collenchyma cells in the keel; a ring of 4 to 6 vascular bundles w ithout bundle sheaths; some cells of midrib have 
druses and raphides, each vascular bundle consists of a centripetal xyl em composed of vessels with spiral 
thickenings, and xylem parenchyma and an outer phloem composed of sieve tube s, companion cells and phloem 
parenchyma with a few small cavities dispersed among them.  
 
Lamina  –A section through the leaf shows well defined upper and lower epidermis  comprised of parenchymatous 
cells rounded in vertical section and angular in surface view; st omata present on both surfaces anomocytic; 
mesophyll of lamina undifferentiated; margin composed of a patch of sc lerenchyma; stomatal index for upper 
surface not more than 4 while for lower surface not more than 5.  
 
Powder – Epidermal cells in surface view showing anticlinal divisions and stomata; fragments consisting of 
hexagonal parenchymatous cells of ground tissue some showing the presenc e of crystals of calcium oxalate as 
druses and raphide; some fragments having vessels, fibers and starch grains als o.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter     -  Not more  than     1     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2  
Total ash      -  Not more  than   20     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3  
Acid - insoluble ash     -  Not more  than     3     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4  
Alcohol - soluble extractive   -  Not less    than     7     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6  
Water - soluble extractive   -  Not less    than     2     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. –  
 
 T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate  (0.2 mm thick) using toluene: ethyl acetate  
(7:3) under UV 366 nm shows spots at R f 0.21 (blue); 0.45 (red); 0.53 (red); 0.66 (pink); 0.71 (red); 0.82 (red); on 
spraying with anisaldehyde- sulphuric acid reagent  and on heating the plate for ten minutes at 105 o spots appear at 
Rf. 0.35 (grey), 0.57 (brownish green), 0.73 (light yellow), 0.78 (brownish green) and 0.87 (brown). 
  
CONSTITUENTS – Triterpenoids: 7-oxo-onocer-8-ene-3 β,21 α-diol; friedelan-3-one; taraxerol; isopentacosanoic 
acid; β-sitosterol.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa :    Ka °u, Ka ¾¢ ya, Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a :    Laghu, Sara, Snigdha, Picchila 
V¤¤¤¤rya :    U ¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka :    Madhura 
Karma :    Balya, Kaphahara, K ¨mighna, P ¢cana, Sandh ¢n¤ya, Stambhana,                                            
      V¢tahara, V ¨¾ya 
  L IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - L¢k¾¢ dya guggulu, Srnkhala Gunah, Vajravalli, 
Asthisrnkhala Guna, Asthisanharaka Guna, K ¢´² avall ¤gu ´a¢ª , Asthisa ¼h¢ra (K ¢´² a), 
Asthisanghatika Yoga, Asthisa ¼h¢ra ªva °ik ¢vidhi ª, Astisanhara Arka Gunah, 
Asthisa ¼h¢ratailam  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES -  Ar ºa (Piles), Asthibhagna (Bone fracture), K ¨mi (Worm 
infestation), Netraroga ( Diseases of the eye), ¹v¢sa ( Asthma), Urustambha (Stiffness in thigh 
muscles), Vra ´a (Ulcer)  
 
DOSE -   Svarasa (Juice): 10 to 20 ml. 
              ¡ drakalka (Paste): 10 to 20 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  LI  BH ¥¥ ¥¥TAKE ¹£¹£ ¹£¹£ (Fruit) 
        Bh ¦take ¹£ consists of dried fruits of Selinum vaginatum C.B. Clarke (Fam. Apiaceae), a glabrous herb 
attaining a height of 1 to 1.5 m distributed in Himalayas from Kashm ir to Kumaon between altitudes of 1800 to 
3900 m. 
SYNONYMS – ¡k¢sam ¢¼si, Mur ¢, Bh ¦rigandh ¢, Gandhamadan ¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES –  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
a) Macroscopic: 
                 Drug consists of yellowish-brown separated mericarps; each meric arp broadly oblong, dorsally 
compressed, 5 to 9 mm long, 3 to 4 mm wide and 1 to 2 mm thick; ridges f ive, yellowish-brown, three dorsal and 
two lateral, the lateral being large, membranous and winged; taste, bitter and s picy; odour, sweet and musk-like.  
b) Microscopic: 
                TS of the mericarp shows epicarp consisting of a single layered epidermis of rectangular, tubular cells 
having thick outer walls, striated cuticle and a few stomata; parenchymatous mesocarp, 3 to 4 layered, thickened, 
lignified and occasionally reticulate in the region of vascular bundl es; a narrow endocarp of elongated, rectangular 
cells; testa composed of single layer of yellowish cells; endos perm consisting of thick-walled cubical parenchyma; 
vascular bundles one in each primary ridge; vittae, four on dorsal, tw o to four on commissural surface, each lined 
internally by endothelial cells and filled with yellowish oil; cells  of endosperm filled with numerous small aleurone 
grains, fixed oil and micro-rosette crystals of calcium oxalate. 
Powder - Light brown, shows epidermal cells of epicarp with striated cuticl e in surface view; fragments of 
yellowish-brown endothelium of vittae; parenchymatous cells with pitt ed thickening; fragments of reticulate 
vessels attached with pitted parenchyma and lignified sclerenchym a with reticulate thickening; patches of 
endospermic parenchymatous cells containing fixed oil, numerous small al eurone grains and micro-rosette crystals 
of calcium oxalate.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ben. :     Bhutakesi 
Hin. :     Bhutakesi, Muramaansi 
Kan. :     Mura 
Mal. :     Moramamsi 
Mar. :     Mura 
Ori. :     Bhutakesi 
Pun. :     Pushwari 
Tel. :     Bhutakesi  LII  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter  - Not more  than     2   per cent, Appendix   2.2.2  
Total ash   - Not more  than     8   per cent, Appendix   2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash  - Not more  than     2   per cent, Appendix   2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive - Not less    than     7   per cent, Appendix   2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive - Not less    than   17   per cent, Appendix   2.2.7  
T.L.C. - 
 T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on precoated silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  TLC plate (E. Merck) of 0.2 mm 
thickness using toluene : ethyl acetate  (85:15) under UV 254 nm shows spots at R f. 0.18 (blue), 0.29 (blue-green), 
0.33 (light blue), 0.50 (bright blue) and 0.61 (green).   
CONSTITUENTS - Essential oil and coumarins.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa : Tikta, Ka °u, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma 
 : Tr ¤do ¾aghna, Vedan ¢hara, Rak ¾oghna, Ke ºya, K ¢ntiprada  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Candan ¢di Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES -  Apasm ¢ra (Epilepsy), Bhrama (Vertigo), Jvara (Fever),  K ¾aya 
(Pthisis), ¹v¢sa (Asthma), M ¦rcch ¢ (Syncope), Raktagata v ¢ta (Hypertension), Raktapitta 
(Bleeding disorder), T ¨¾¢ (Thirst), V ¢tavy ¢dhi (Disease due to Vata dosa) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder) :1 to  3 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  LIII  BH ¥¥ ¥¥TAKE ¹£¹£ ¹£¹£ (Rhizome) 
Bh ¦take ¹£ consists of dried rhizomes of Selinum vaginatum C.B. Clarke (Fam. Apiaceae), a glabrous herb 
attaining a height of 1 to 1.5 m distributed in Himalayas from Kashm ir to Kumaon between altitudes of 1800 and 
3900 m.  
 
SYNONYMS – Rocanatagara, M ¢ns ¤ Vi ºe¾a 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
a) Macroscopic: 
               Dried rhizome pieces cylindrical, curved, upto 12 cm long and 0.5 cm thick ; surface earthy brown to 
brown in colour, rough, longitudinally wrinkled, bearing horizontally arranged, protruded lenticels and circular 
scars of roots; fracture short, horny revealing distinct creamis h white, central cylinder of wood and brownish bark 
towards periphery; odour not distinct; taste, astringent. 
b) Microscopic: 
              TS of rhizome show multilayered cork of thin walled rectangular c ells; cork cambium not distinct; cortex 
consists of 5 to 10 to several rows of circular to oval parenchyma cells with groups of sclereids; secondary phloem 
wide, largely composed of parenchyma, a few fibres, obliterated sie ve elements and interspersed with oval 
secretory canals; cambium is distinct, consisting of 6 to 8 layer s of thin walled, small rectangular cells; secondary 
xylem consists of vessels, tracheids, fibres and xylem parenchyma;  xylem vessels occur singly or in groups of 2 to 
5; medullary rays multiseriate, traversing both xylem and phloem; pith consists of large circular to oval pitted cells 
filled with round, simple or  compound starch grains with 2 to 5 components, measuring 5 to 15 µ in diameter.  
Powder - Light brown, shows fragments of cork in surface view; groups of sclerei ds; patches of pitted parenchyma; 
spiral and pitted vessels and round, simple or compound starch grains measuring 5 to 15 µ in diameter. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter               - Not more  than      2    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.2  
Total ash   - Not more  than      8    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.3  
Acid - insoluble ash  - Not more  than      4    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.4  
Alcohol - soluble extractive - Not less    than    23    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.6  
Water - soluble extractive - Not less    than      7    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.7  Ben. :     Bhutakesi 
Hin. :     Bhutakesi, Muramaansi 
Kan. :     Mura 
Mal. :     Moramamsi 
Mar. :     Mura 
Ori. :     Bhutakesi 
Pun. :     Pushwari 
Tel. :     Bhutakesi  LIV   
T.L.C. - 
T.L.C. of ethanolic extract (cold maceration at room temperature) of  the drug on precoated silica gel ‘G’ 
60 F 254  TLC plate of 0.2 mm thickness using solvent system toluene: ethyl acetate  (9.2: 0.8) shows spots R f  0.15 
(dark brown), 0.26 (magenta), 0.29 (dark orange), 0.39 (violet), 0.49 (light pink), 0.54 (brownish-yellow), 0.59 
(light pink), 0.85 (magenta), 0.95 (magenta), and  on spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid reagent  followed 
by heating at 105º for 10 minutes. 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Coumarins: vaginatin, selinidin, vaginol, vaginidin and archangelone. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
Rasa : Ka ¾¢ ya, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Sugandhi, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Trido ¾ahara, Vedan ¢hara, Rak ¾oghna, Ke ºya, Vra ´aºodhana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug 
  
THERAPEUTIC USES -  Apasm ¢ra (Epilepsy), Jvara (Fever), K āsa (Cough), Kr /uniF023mi 
(Helminthiasis), Pratisyaya (Coryza), Ucca Raktacapa (Hypertensi on), Unm ¢da (Mania / 
psychosis), V ¢tavy ¢dhi (Disease due to Vata dosa) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder ): 3 to 6 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  LV  B££££JAPATR ¡ ¡ ¡ ¡ (Whole Plant) 
 
B¤japatr ¢    consists of the dried whole plant of Adiantum capillus-veneris  L. {Fam. Adiantaceae 
(Polypodiaceae) a terrestrial fern occurring throughout the hills i n India in moist shady places especially on damp 
old walls and crevices of rocks. 
 
SYNONYMS -  K ¨¾´ada ´² ik ¢, Ha ¼sapad ¤sad ¨º¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES -  
 
Eng. :  Maiden-hair fern 
Guj. :  Kaalo hansaraaj, Hanspadi 
Hin. :  Kaalaa Hansraja 
Kan. :  Hansraaja, Mubaraka 
Mal. :  Plavu 
Mar. :  Hansraaja 
Ori. :  Hansraaja 
Tel. :  Naalla Hamsapadu 
Urd. :  Parsiaoshan 
 
DESCRIPTION-  
a) Macroscopic: 
 
Rhizome  –Brown, soft with variable lengths upto 7 mm in thickness, paleae covering the rhizome, r oot present. 
 
Root  –Well branched, black coloured, thin, wiry and arising in clusters from the underside of the r hizome. 
 
 
Frond  –Circinately coiled in the bud condition, rachis dark and shining, bi or tri pinnate often covered with paleae 
that may extend onto rachis and also sometimes on pinnules or leaflet s, pinnae stalked, rachis may terminate in a 
pinna or may be elongated bearing a vegetative bud at the tip, rachi s divides pinnately and the ultimate branches 
bear pinnules in an alternate manner; the terminal pinnule usually dif fers in shape and size; the venation is open 
and dichotomous, veins spread in the a fan like manner in the lamina; s ub marginal sori borne at the distal ends of 
the pinnae or pinnules and consists of sporangia borne superficially over a short portion towards the distal regions 
of the veins, the ultimate ends of the veins do not bear sporangia. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Root  –Epidermis single layered; cuticle present; cortex of two zones, out er parenchymatous usually 3 layered and 
inner sclerenchymatous; endodermis distinct with casparian thickening ; pericycle distinct; stele diarch and exarch; 
phloem forms two conspicuous groups alternating with the xylem. 
 
Rhizome –Epidermis single layered, thin walled; cuticle present; cortex pa renchymatous filled with starch grains; 
stele dictyosetle, 5 to 7 meristeles; each meristele is a protostelic type surrounded by a distinct endodermis and 
pericycle; xylem exarch and diarch surrounded by phloem.  
 
  LVI   Frond  – 
 
Rachis – Epidermis single layered with thick cuticle, followed by 1 or 2 la yered sclerenchymatous hypodermis; 
cortex parenchymatous and contains starch grains; stele consists of single layered endodermis followed by 
pericycle; xylem triarch, exarch, surrounded by phloem.  
 
Petiole – Epidermis single layered with thick cuticle, followed by sclere nchymatous cortex; vascular bundle 
consists of single layered endodermis and pericycle; xylem surrounded by phloem.  
 
Pinnule – Mid-vein –laterally flat outline; mesophyll one or 2 layered; vas cular bundle surrounded by thick 
sclerenchymatous bundle sheath, followed by a single layered endodermis and pericycle; xylem surrounded by 
phloem. 
  
Lamina –Undifferentiated, with one or 2 layered irregular shaped cells in t he mesophyll; stomata present in lower 
epidermis; epidermal cells are elongated, parallel to the long a xis of the leaf, in surface view more wavy in abaxial 
side and less wavy in adaxial side; stomatal number 30 to 35/mm 2; stomatal index for lower epidermis 32 to 35; 
fertile leaves present showing sporangia.  
  
Powder – Dark reddish brown, spiral vessels, fibres, starch grains 10 to 20 µ, epidermis with stomata present, 
sporangium upto 400 µ in size with stalk and head, stalk 2 or 3 cells w ide and about 4 cells long, head biconvex in 
shape and single layered wall with annulus (thick wall) and stomium  (thin wall), spores homosporous tetrahedral, 
triradiate ridge with concave side and upto 90 µ in size. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
 
Foreign matter                  -  Not more than     2      per cent,  Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash     -  Not more than   15      per cent,  Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid - insoluble ash      -  Not more than   10      per cent,  Appendix   2.2.4 
Water- soluble extractive    -  Not less than       4      per cent,  Appendix   2.2.6 
Alcohol- soluble extractive    -  Not less than     10      per cent,  Appendix   2.2.7 
 
T.L.C.- 
 
T.L.C. of chloroform extract on aluminium plates precoated with silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  of 0.2 mm thickness 
using toluene : ethyl acetate  (6:1)  under UV 254 nm shows spots at R f. 0.18, 0.22, 0.40, 0.64, 0.71, 0.76, 0.80 and 
0.87 (all green). Under UV 366 nm fluorescent zones at R f. 0.18 (pink), 0.20, 0.32 (both purple), 0.36, 0.55, 0.59 
(all pink), 0.66 (blue), 0.70, 0.80 (both pink).  On spraying the plates with vanillin-sulphuric acid reagent  and 
heating at 105° for 5 minutes,  spots at R f.  0.29 (blue), 0.40, 0.46 (both purple), 0.55 (yellow), 0.66 (purple), 0.76 
(green), 0.88, 0.93 (both grey) appear. 
 
CONSTITUENTS -  Adiantone; adiantoxide; astragalin; nicotiflorin; isoquercitrin; rut in; kaempferol-3-O-
rutinoside; 1-caffeylglucose and sulphate esters of 1-coumarylglucose  and 1-coumarylgalactose; kaempferol-3-
glucuronide; quercetin; β-sitosterol; stigmasterol; campesterol 
 
 
  LVII   
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa : Ka ¾¢ya, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Guru 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma 
 : Ka ´°hya, Kaphahara, Kaphapitta º¢maka, M ¦trajanana,   
  Ras ¢yana, Stambhana, Vi ¾aghna, Vra ´aropa ´a 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Vasa Yoga  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES –  Agnirohini (Diphtheia (Acute), Angamarda (Body ache), Apa ºm¢ra 
(Epilepsy), Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), Bhrama (Vertigo), D ¢ha (Burning sensation), Gulma (Abdominal 
lump), Jvara (Fever), K āsa (Cough), L ¦t¢vi ¾a (Spider bite), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), Raktapitta 
(Bleeding disorders), Raktavik ¢ra (Disorders of blood), ¹o¾a (Emaciation), ¹otha (Oedema), ¹v¢sa 
(Asthma), Svrabheda (Hoarseness of voice), Visarpa (Erysepales), Vra ´a (Ulcer)    
  
DOSE -  C¦r´a (Powder): 1 to 3 g. 
             Svarasa (Juice) : 10  to 20 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  LVIII  BIMB £ (Leaf) 
 
Bimb £ consists of the dried leaves of Coccinia grandis  (L.) Voigt Syn. C. cordifolia  Cogn , C.indica  W & 
A, Cephalandra indica  Naud. (Fam. Cucurbitaceae), a monoecious perennial climber, distributed all  over India and 
often cultivated. 
  
SYNONYMS –  Raktaphal ¢, Tu ´²¤, Bimbik ¢, O ¾°hopamaphal ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES -  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
a) Macroscopic:   
 
Bulk colour dark green; leaves brittle; simple, alternate, peti olate, exstipulate, 5 to 10 cm. long and 4 to 8 
cm in width; lamina variable in size, usually 5 angled with shall ow sinuses; bright green above with blackish dots 
on the surface and paler beneath; palmately reticulate with five  main veins, base cordate, apex acute, margin more 
or less sinuate toothed; surface of the lamina rough.   
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Midrib  -TS of midrib is flat toward adaxial surface and ridged towards aba xial side; epidermal cells of adaxial and 
abaxial surface brick shaped; hypodermis adjacent to both epidermis col lenchymatous; ground tissue of 
parenchyma containing prismatic calcium oxalate crystals;  two vascular bundles present, one towards adaxial and 
the other towards abaxial surface; adaxial vascular bundle smaller  than that of abaxial surface; xylem composed of 
vessels with annular and spiral thickenings, xylem parenchyma, and fi bres; phloem contains sieve tubes with 
simple sieve plates, companion cells, parenchyma and fibres.  
 
Lamina  -TS through laminar region shows that the leaf is dorsiventral; cut icle present; epidermal cells of adaxial 
surface slightly elongated, larger and oval where  black dots re presenting glands present; the epidermal cells of 
abaxial surface are brick shaped; cuticle present; palisade lay er a single row; and absent over midrib region; spongy 
parenchyma cells chlorenchymatous and wavy walled; xylem contains v essels with annular and spiral thickenings; Ass. : Kanabhaturi 
Ben. : Tela Kuccha, Bimbu 
Eng. : Ivy gourd 
Guj. : Gholam, Ghilodi, Tindoran, Kadavi Ghilodi 
Hin. : Kunduru, Kunru 
Kan. : Tonde balli 
Mal. : Koval, Kova, Nallakova 
Mar. : Tondlee 
Ori. : Kainchi kakudi, Bano Kundri 
Pun. : Kunduru, Kunduri 
Tam. : Kovai 
Tel. : Donda tige 
Urd. : Kunduru  LIX  epidermal cells of both adaxial and abaxial epidermis in surface view ar e occasionally elongated, walls thin, deeply 
sinuate; multicellular sessile glandular trichomes with head me asuring 100 to 120 µ in diameter are present on 
adaxial epidermis; covering trichomes measuring 18 to 20 wide and 280 t o 300 µ long, gradually tapering are 
sparsely distributed and are localised  at the costal region of t he adaxial epidermis; stomata anomocytic ; stomatal 
index of abaxial epidermis 20 to 25, adaxial surface 16 to 18. 
   
Powder - Light green, shows epidermal cells, anomocytic stomata, concentric starch grains 3 to 5 µ in diameter, 
xylem vessels with annular and spiral thickenings; calcium  oxala te crystals, epidermal fragments with glands and 
trichomes.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGH - 
 
Foreign matter                 -        Not more than     2      per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash   -       Not more than     6      per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid- insoluble ash   -       Not more than     2      per cent,   Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol -soluble extractive          -      Not less than       15      per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6 
Water -soluble extractive           -      Not less than       38     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. - 
 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate using n-hexane: ethyl acetate  (9:1) under UV 366 nm 
shows fluorescent spots (all blue)  R f. values 0.12, 0.39, 0.47, 0.55, 0.78 and 0.92; on exposure to iodine vapours   
two spots (both yellow) appear at R f.  0.05, 0.12 and 0.39. On spraying with 5% methanolic sulphuric acid reagent  
and heating the plate for 10 minutes at 105 ° seven spots appear at R f. values, 0.12, 0.29, 0.39, 0.47, 0.55, 0.61 and 
0.78. 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Cephalandrine A, cephalandrine B, cephalandrine, β-sitosterol and triacontane. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION –  
 
Rasa : Madhura, Ka ¾¢ ya, Tikta  
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Gr ¢h¤, Kapha pittahara, V ¢takara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS –  Bimb ¤gh ¨atam, Bimbi Guna, Bimbi Phala Guna, Bimb ¤gu ´¢ h, 
Bimbi Guna, Bimbi Gunam , Bimbi Saka, Bimbi Puspam, Bimbi Phalam, Tundi Ghrt, Kunadaru 
guna, Tiktatundi Guna, Bimb ¢gh ¨tam, Bimb ¤ (Pa ®c¢¬ ga), Bimb ¤phalam 
  
THERAPEUTIC USES - Kāmal ā (Jaundice), Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus), P ¦ya meha 
(Dysuria) 
  
DOSE  -  Svarasa(Juice) :  10 to 20 ml 
              C¦r´a (Powder) : 3 to 6 g 
  LX  BIMB £ (Stem)  
 
             Bimb £ is the dried stem of Coccinia grandis  (L.) Voigt Syn. C. cordifolia  Cogn., C. indica , W & A.,  
Cephalandra  indica  Naud  (Fam. Cucurbitaceae), a monoecious perennial  climber distribut ed all over India and 
often cultivated.   
 
SYNONYMS –  Raktaphal ¢, Tu ´² ¤, Bimbik ¢, O ¾°hopamaphal ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES – 
 
Ass. :  Kanabhaturi 
Ben. :  Tela Kuccha, Bimbu 
Eng. :  Ivy gourd 
Guj. :  Gholam, Ghilodi, Tindoran, Kadavi Ghilodi 
Hin. :  Kunduru, Kunru 
Kan. :  Tonde balli 
Mal. :  Koval, Kova, Nallakova 
Mar. :  Tondlee 
Ori. :  Kainchi kakudi, Bano Kundri 
Pun. :  Kunduru, Kunduri 
Tam. :  Kovai 
Tel. :  Donda tige 
Urd. :  Kunduru 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
a)  Macroscopic: 
  
          Stems pieces measuring 2 to 10 cm in length and 0.5 to 4 cm in thicknes s, externally   ridged, grey or 
greenish grey; cut surface smooth with a thin bark and abundant light coloured central wide wood; odour and taste 
indistinct. 
 
b)  Microscopic : 
 
             In TS the mature stem consists of cork, composed of stratified r ectangular, tangentially elongated cells; 
cortex   composed of 10 to 15 layers of thin walled, isodiametric parenc hymatous cells with intercellular spaces, 
filled with numerous concentric starch grains, of about 5 µ in diameter; pericycle  in the form of patches   of fibres, 
with thick walls, narrow lumen, measuring 10 to 15 µ in diameter; vascular bundles  conjoint, wedge shaped, 
bicollateral, phloem contains sieve tubes, companion cells, extensive pa renchyma of isodiametric cells, and fibres 
of 550 to 625 µ long and  12 to 18 µ width , xylem consists of  vessels with reticulate and scalar iform thickenings, 
protoxylem elements possess annular and spiral thickenings; very shor t fibres upto 30 µ in width, walls   very  
thick  with  simple pits;  medullary rays  multiseriate, com posed of  18 to 22 radially elongated with some   filled 
with starch grains; pith scanty, parenchymatous, cells isodiametric, thin wall ed. 
 
Powder - Pale cream, microscopically it shows isodiametric parenchymatous  cells, xylem and phloem fibres, sieve 
tubes, sieve plates and vessels; paranchymatous cells  filled with numerous conc entric starch grains upto about 5 µ; 
xylem vessels with, scalariform and reticulate thickenings.  LXI   
IDENTITY PURITY AND STRENGTH -  
 
Foreign matter                  -  Not more than     2     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash     -  Not more than   10     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash     -  Not more than     1     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble  extractive   -  Not less than     33     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive   -  Not less than     40     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. -  
 
           T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate using n-hexane: ethyl acetate  (9:1) under UV  366 nm 
shows fluorescent spots (all blue) at R f.  0.10, 0.15, 0.35, 0.47, 0.50, 0.63 and 0.72, on exposure to iodine vapours  
spots (all yellow) at R f.  0.15, 0.47, 0.63 and 0.94, on spraying with 5% methanolic sulphuric acid reagent  and 
heating the plate for 10 minutes at 105 ° spots appear at R f.  0.10, 0.15, 0.35, 0.47, 0.50, 0.63, 0.72 and 0.94. 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Alkaloids such as cephalandrine-A, cephalandrine- B sand  β - sitosterol, triacontane 
.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -   
 
Rasa :  Ka ¾¢ya, Tikta, Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a :  Laghu 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka :  Ka °u 
Karma :  Gr ¢h¤, Kapha pittahara, V ¢takara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS -  Bimb ¤gh ¨atam, Bimbi Guna, Bimbi Phala Guna, 
Bimb ¤gu ´¢ h, Bimbi Guna, Bimbi Gunam , Bimbi Saka, Bimbi Puspam, Bimbi Phalam, Tundi 
Ghrt, Kunadaru guna, Tiktatundi Guna, Bimb ¢gh ¨tam, Bimb ¤ (Pa ®c¢¬ ga), Bimb ¤phalam 
  
THERAPEUTIC USES -  Aruci (Tastelessness), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Prav ¢hik ¢ 
(Dysentery), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder) 
 
DOSE -  C ¦r´a (Powder): 3 to 6 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
  LXII  B§§ §§HAT DUGDHIK ¡¡ ¡¡ (Whole Plant)  
 
 B¨hat Dugdhik ¢    consists of dried whole plant of Euphorbia hirta  L. Syn. E. pilulifera Auct. non L. (Fam. 
Euphorbiaceae), a small erect or ascending annual herb with milky latex, found t hroughout the hotter parts of India 
as a common weed.  
 
SYNONYMS - Dugdhik ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. :     Barakherui 
Eng. :     Asthma weed 
Guj. :     Dudhelo, Dudeli, Dudhi 
Hin. :     Dudhi, Badi dudhdi 
Mal. :     Nelapalai 
Mar. :     Mothi dudhi, Naayato, Dudhi, Dudali, Mothi naayati 
Ori. :     Dudili, Dudoli 
Pun.. :     Dudhi 
Tam. :     Ammanpatchaiarisi 
Tel. :     Reddivarinanubalu, Nanubalu 
 
DESCRIPTION –  
 
a) Macroscopic:  
 
Root  –Six to 9 cm long, 2 to 3 mm in dia., almost cylindrical with tapering ends, small rootlets, surface smooth, 
except for small protuberances at certain places.  
 
Stem  –Erect, usually branched, terete, branches often compressed, covered wit h crisp hairs, stem pieces 3 to 5 mm 
tick in dia., very thin bark, fracture short. 
 
Leaf  –Petiolate, petioles about 3 mm long; occasionally reddish, simple, opposite, superposed, subse ssile, 1 to 4 by 
0.5 cm. oblong, lanceolate or obovate lanceolate, acute or sub acute, dentate , minutely stipulate, dark green above 
pale beneath, venation reticulate. 
 
Flower  –Infloresence shortly pedunculate, axillary cymes; bracteate; peri anth absent, involucres numerous, less 
than 1 to 1.5 mm long on single stalked stamen, anthers two celled; pis til tricarpellary, ovary superior, axile 
placentation.  
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Root  –TS shows outermost region of cork consisting of 4 or 5 layers of thin walled, brown suberised rectangular 
parenchymatous cells; cork cambium seen; cortex consists of 6 to 8 l ayers of tangentially elongated 
parenchymatous cells without intercellular spaces; some of these cells contain simple starch grains and prismatic 
calcium oxalate crystals; the vascular cylinder has thin wall ed polygonal phloem cells, xylem consists of vessels 
and thick walled parenchyma, traversed by uniseriate medullary rays; pith abse nt. 
  LXIII  Stem  –TS shows nearly circular outline, epidermal cells slightly cells s lightly elongated laterally with thick cuticle; 
multicellular, uniseriate covering trichomes about 30 to 200 in length; cortex consists  of 6 to 8 layers of rounded or 
oval shaped parenchymatous cells, a few cells containing simple, ova l shaped starch grains and prismatic calcium 
oxalate crystals; next to the cortex is a broad vascular cylinder  separated by an endodermis and a single layer of 
pericyle; phloem narrow and xylem has reticulate vessels; pith c onsists of circular cells with intercellular spaces, 
prismatic calcium oxalate crystals measuring about 8 to 25 µ are seen in a few ce lls.  
 
Leaf –  
 
Petiole – TS shows somewhat circular outline; epidermis single layered, ext ernally covered with thick cuticle and 
have covering trichomes similar to that of stem; stele compose d of vascular bundle located in center, xylem 
composed of vessels with protoxylem facing towards upper surface and phl oem on the abaxial side, enclosed 
within a bundle sheath; ground tissue composed of thin walled parenchymatous cells, a few having prismatic 
calcium oxalate crystal and starch grains.  
 
Midrib – Strongly projects on the lower side; epidermis single layered wi th thick cuticle on both surfaces; 
collenchyma single layered present only on lower surface just adja cent to lower epidermis; stele shows similar 
structure as described in petiole except bundle sheath is very promine nt and shows starch grains in a few cells; 
prismatic calcium oxalate crystal and starch grains in a few cells of ground t issue.  
 
Lamina – Shows dorsiventral structure; epidermis single layered on either surface, upper epidermis consists of 
tabular cells, walls slightly wavy in surface view; wherea s walls of lower epidermal cells straight; trichomes 
similar to those of stem; palisade two layered; spongy parenchyma  2 to 4 layered, loosely arranged; vascular 
bundles embedded in spongy parenchyma; stomata anomocytic present on both surf aces; palisade ratio 5 or 6, 
stomatal index 27 to 36 on lower surface and 25 to 30 / mm 2 on upper surface, vein islet number 1 to 2, veinlet 
termination number 6 to 9.  
 
Powder – Yellowish brown, shows abundant fragments of parenchymatous cells, a few  filled with starch grains; 
vessels with reticulate and spiral thickenings; phloem fibres; crystals of calcium oxalate in the form of prism; 
abundant covering, multicellular trichomes, and a few parenchymatous cells with brow nish contents.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter   -  Not more  than     2     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2  
Total ash    -  Not more  than   12     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash   -  Not more  than     7     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive -  Not less    than     3     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive -  Not less    than   10     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. –  
 
 T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate using toluene: ethyl acetate  (95:5) under UV 366 nm 
shows fluorescent zones at R f. 0.15 (grey), 0.32 (pink) and 0.36 (green). On spraying with vanillin-sulphuric acid 
reagent and heating the plate for five minutes at 105 o four spots appear at R f. 0.22 (pink), 0.36 (violet), 0.70 (pale 
violet) and 0.91 (purple).  
 
CONSTITUENTS – Flavonoids, ellagotannins and triterpenoids.  LXIV   
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Ka °u, Tikta, Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a : R ¦k¾a, Guru, T ¤k¾´a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma 
 : Garbhak ¢raka, Kaphahara, M ¦trala, ¹le ¾maniss ¢raka,  
   Stanya, V ¨¾ya, Vi ¾°ambh ¤ 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATION –  Dugdhik ¢ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - Dadru (Taeniasis), K ¨mi (Worm infestation), K ¢sa (Cough), Ku ¾°ha 
(Leprosy / diseases of skin), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), P ¦yameha, Śū la (Pain / colic), 
Tamaka ºv¢sa (Bronchial asthma) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 1 to 3 g. 
             Svarasa (Juice): 10 to 20 drops. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  LXV  B§§ §§HAT ££££ (Whole Plant) 
B¨hat ¤ consists of dried whole plant of Solanum anguivi Lam. Syn. S. indicum  L.(Fam. Solanaceae), a 
prickly, much branched perennial undershrub, up to 1.8 m high, mostly found throughout wa rmer parts of the 
country upto an elevation of 1500 m. 
SYNONYMS – B¨hatka ´°ak ¢r¤, Mahadvy ¢ghr ¤, Si ¼hik ¢, Bhan °¢k¤, Vanav ¨nt ¢ka  
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
a) Macroscopic: 
Root - Root well developed, long, ribbed, woody, cylindrical, pale yellowish-brown, 1 t o 2.5 cm in dia; a number 
of secondary roots and their branches present, surface rough due to presenc e of longitudinal striations and root 
scars; fracture, short and splintery; no distinct odour and taste. 
 
Stem  - Dried stem pieces cylindrical, prickly, about 2 to 5 cm in length a nd 0.5 to 2 cm in thickness; external 
surface greyish-green, rough, longitudinally fissured and bearing longit udinally arranged vertical lenticels and 
recurved flattened spines; transversely cut smooth surface shows narrow brownish bark towards periphery and 
creamish -white wood around central pith; fracture hard, fibrous, breaks with snap; odour not di stinct, taste bitter. 
 
Leaf  - Leaves simple, petiolated, subentire or pinnatifid, occuring in broke n, curled pieces of different sizes; upper 
surface grayish-green and lower surface whitish in colour; fracture brittle ; taste, bitter. 
 
Fruit – Dried berries globose, yellow to reddish-brown in colour measuring about 0.5 to 1 cm in diameter bearing 
small spiny remains of stigma on one side and calyx with attached pedicels on other side; taste astringent; seeds 
many in dried pulp.  
 Ass. :   Tidbhagnri, Tidbaghuri 
Ben. :   Vyaakud, Byakura  
Eng. :   Indian Nightshade 
Guj. :   Ubhi ringni, Ubhimo ringni 
Hin. :   Badi kateri, Kataai, Vanbhantaa  
Kan. :   Kirigulia, Heggullu 
Mal. :   Cheru vazhuthina, Putiri chunda 
Mar. :   Dorli, Ringani 
Ori. :   Lavyaankudi, Dengaabheji, Bryhoti 
Pun. :   Kandwaari vaddi  
Tam. :   Pappar mulli, Cheru vazhuthalai, Mullamkatti 
Tel. :   Tella mulaka  
Urd. :   Badi kateli  LXVI  b) Microscopic: 
Root  - TS of root shows thin cork composed of 5 to 15 layers of thin-walled, ta ngentially elongated, rectangular 
cells filled with yellowish-brown content; cork cambium single la yered; secondary cortex composed of 5 to 9 
layers of thin-walled, oval and tangentially elongated cells; st one cells present in singles or in groups of 2 to 5 or 
more in this region; secondary phloem composed of sieve elements, pare nchyma and stone cells, traversed by 
phloem rays; phloem parenchyma abundant, thin-walled; stone cells present  in outer phloem region in singles or 
groups of 2 to 5, varying greatly in shape and size; phloem rays  1 t o 3 cells wide, isodiamteric  to slightly radially 
elongated in inner phloem region and radially elongated in outer phloem region, occ asionally stone cells also found 
in medullary rays; wood occupies bulk of root and composed of vessels, t racheids, fibres and xylem parenchyma, 
traversed by xylem rays, all elements being lignified; vesse ls occurs singly or in groups of 2 to 5 with simple pits; 
xylem fibres moderately thick-walled with simple pits and pointed ends found in abundance; xylem parenchyma 
have simple pits or reticulate thickening; xylem rays uni to bis eriate, thick-walled, cells radially elongated and 
pitted, microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate as sandy masse s and simple starch grains present in some cells 
of secondary cortex, phloem and medullary rays; simple and rounded to oval starc h grains, measuring 5.5 to 11.6 µ 
m in diameter. 
Stem  - TS of stem shows cork composed of 4 or 5 layers of rectangular ce lls interrupted by lenticels and at places 
bearing multicellular branched trichomes; cortex consists of an outer  zone of 5 to 8 layers of small, rounded 
parenchyma cells filled with brownish contents, and inner cortex consist ing of 4 or 5 rows of oval to round, 
comparatively larger parenchyma cells; groups of pericyclic f ibres present outside the phloem; phloem composed 
of sieve elements, phloem fibres and phloem parenchyma filled with bl ack-coloured contents; xylem composed of 
vessels, tracheids, fibres and parenchyma; xylem vessels occur s ingly or in groups of 2 to 5 with pitted walls; 
xylem rays uniseriate, consisting of radially elongated parenchyma  cells; pith composed of circular to oval 
parenchyma cells filled with starch grains. 
Leaf- 
Petiole  - TS of petiole shows a single layered epidermis of parenchyma ce lls interrupted at places by multicellular, 
branched  trichomes and glandular trichomes; 3 or 4 layered hypodermis of chlorenc hyma cells; ground tissue of 
round parenchyma cells encircling a large, conjoint, collateral, arc h-shaped, vascular bundle in the centre and two 
small vascular bundles in the wings region below hypodermis. 
Lamina – TS of leaf shows a dorsiventral structure with a single layer ed epidermis on both surfaces interrupted at 
places by multicellular, branched  trichomes; bilayered palisade of columnar cells below upper epidermis and 3 or 4 
layered spongy mesophyll of round to oval parenchyma cells.  
Midrib -Contains a single vascular bundle consisting of radially arranged xylem and phloem; patches of 
collenchyma on both dorsal and ventral side of vascular bundle below epidermis. 
Powder -Shows cork in surface view; leaf epidermis in surface view;  abundant branched multicellular trichomes; 
yellowish fragments of epicarp and greenish fragments of testa in surface v iew; thin walled fibres; pitted and spiral 
vessels; microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate and circular, simple or  2 to 4 compound starch grains. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter               - Not more than      2    per cent , Appendix   2.2.2  
Total ash   - Not more than    12    per cent , Appendix   2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash  - Not more than      5    per cent , Appendix    2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive - Not less than        4    per cent , Appendix    2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive - Not less than        6    per cent , Appendix    2.2.7   LXVII  T.L.C. –  
T.L.C. of ethanolic extract (cold maceration at room temperature) of  the drug on precoated silica gel ‘G’ 
60 F 254  TLC plate of 0.2 mm thickness using solvent system toluene: ethyl acetate  (7:3) shows spots at R f.  0.16 
(light grey), 0.28 (grey), 0.43 (light pink), 0.55 (green), 0.62 (pink), 0.66 (dark pink), 0.77 (light pink) and 0.85 
(pink) on spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid reagent  followed by heating at 105º for 10 minutes. 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Steroidal saponins:  Protodiscin saponin C, indioside A, B, C, D and E; solafuranone. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATION  – Dashmularishta, Dashmulakwath  
THERAPEUTIC USES -  ¡mado ¾a (Products of impaired digeston and metabolism), Agnim ¢ndya 
(Digestive impairment), Aruci (Tastelessness), Chardi (Emes is), H ¨droga (Heart 
dieseases),  Hikk ¢ (Hiccup), Jvara (Fever), K ¨mi (Worm infestation / 
Helminthiasis), K ¢sa (Cough), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy/ diseases of skin), Netraroga 
(Diseases of the eye), Prati ¾y¢ya (Rhinitis), Svarabheda (Hoarseness),  ¹ v¢sa 
(Asthma) , ¹¦la (Pain) 
 
DOSE –  C ¦r´a (Powder) :  3 to 6 g. 
              Kv ¢tha (Decoction)       : 40 to 80 ml. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rasa :Tikta, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a :Laghu, R ¦k¾a, T ¤k¾´a 
V¤¤¤¤rya :U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka :Ka °u 
Karma :D ¤pana, Gr ¢h¤, H ¨dya, Kaphahara, Ke ºya, P ¢cana, V ¢tahara,  
 Vedan ¢sth ¢pana  LXVIII  CA ³³ ³³AKA (Whole Plant) 
  Ca ´aka consists of the whole plant of Cicer arietinum  L. (Fam. Fabaceae), a much branched herb 
cultivated in most parts of India for its seeds used as pulses. 
 
 
SYNONYMS –  Harimantha ª, Sakalapriya, V ¢jimantha 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass.      :      Imas 
Ben.      :      Chholaa 
Eng.      :      Bengal gram, Chick pea, Gram 
Guj.      :      Chanaa, Chanya 
Hin.      :      Buut, Chanaa, Chunnaa, Chane, Chholaa 
Kan.      :      Kadale 
Mal.      :      Katal 
Mar.      :      Harbaraa, Chane  
Punj.        :      Chholaa 
Tam.      :      Katalai, Kadalai, Kondakkadalai 
Tel.      :      Sangalu 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
a)  Macroscopic:  
Root - Root upto 25 cm long, 2 to 12 mm thick with secondary and tertiary roots, s urface light brown, rough with 
longitudinal wrinkles; fracture, tough showing creamish interior; odour, mild and tast e characteristic. . 
 
Stem - Stem elongated, with nodes and internodes, variable in length, upto 6 mm in diameter, surface pale brown 
with a few purple patches and longitudinal wrinkles; fracture, short showing creamish interior; odour,  mild and 
characteristic taste. 
 
Leaf - Leaf compound, imparipinnate,  leaflets 8 to 13 pairs, each upto 1 cm in le ngth and 5 mm in width; light 
brown; oval to oblong, margin serrate, base round, apex acute, both surfaces pubescent; odour characteristic; taste, 
sour. 
 
Fruit -  Fruit turgid, pod with persistent calyx and short stalk; 1.5 to 2.0 cm in length and 5 mm to 1 c m in breadth; 
apex acute, base tapering, surface light brown, pubescent; seeds 1 to 3, br own, triangular, with pointed apex, 
micropyle present below the apex; cotyledons 2, yellowish to dark yell ow; odour, mild but specific; taste, slightly 
astringent. 
 
b)  Microscopic: 
Root - Root shows single layered epidermis followed by cortex consisting of 5 to 8 layers of thin walled 
parenchyma cells; pericycle represented by patches of long, thick walled and lignified fibres; phloem composed of 
sieve tubes, companion cells and phloem parenchyma being traversed by uni  to triseriate, thin walled medullary 
rays; xylem shows vessels, tracheids, fibres, parenchyma and medull ary rays with thick and pitted walls ; vessels 
and tracheids show bordered pits, parenchyma cells simple pitted and fi bres have simple oblique pits; pith 
composed of thin walled parenchyma cells. 
 
Stem  -  Circular in outline with 5 to 6 small ridges; epidermis single l ayered covered externally with cuticle, some 
of them elongate to form long unicellular as well as glandular tr ichomes with 2 or 3 celled stalk and 4 to 6 celled 
head, both measuring from 350 to 680 µ in length; cortex composed of collenchyma and parenchyma; collenchyma  LXIX  cells present below the ridges only; pericycle represented by pat ches of fibres; phloem consists of sieve tubes, 
companion cells and phloem parenchyma being traversed by uni to biseriat e medullary rays; xylem shows border 
pitted vessels and tracheids, simple pitted parenchyma cells and long fibr es, all the elements being thick walled and 
lignified; pith composed of thin walled circular to oval parenchyma cells. 
 
Leaf -   
 
 Rachis -crescent shaped in outline; epidermis single layered with both covering and glandula r trichomes similar to 
those of stem; cortex consists of thin walled circular to oval pa renchyma cells; central region occupied by large 
vascular bundle in the middle flanked by 2 small vascular bundles on ea ch side; small patches of pericycle present 
on both upper and lower sides of vascular bundles. 
 
Midrib -shows single layered epidermis covered with cuticle, centre of m idrib occupied by vascular bundle with 
small patches of sclerenchymatous cells on both dorsal and ventral side; remaining  portion occupied by thin walled 
parenchyma cells. 
 
Lamina - shows dorsiventral structure; epidermis single layered covered e xternally with cuticle, covering and 
glandular trichomes similar to those of stem present on both surface s; in surface view upper epidermal cells larger 
with some what straight walls, lower epidermal cells smalle r with sinuous walls, anomocytic and a few anisocytic 
stomata present on both surfaces; mesophyll shows two layers of pali sade cells below the upper epidermis followed 
by cells of spongy parenchyma, a number of small vascular bundles pres ent in mesophyll; stomatal index  11 to 13 
(upper surface), 22 to 25 (lower surface); palisade ratio  3 to 5. 
 
Fruit -Fruit shows single layered epicarp covered with cuticle, covering  and glandular trichomes similar to stem; 
mesocarp consists of thin walled parenchyma cells, a number of vasc ular bundles similar to leaf present in a row; 
lower mesocarpic region shows a band of 3 to 4 layers of lignified s clereids with narrow lumen, followed by a row 
of thick walled and lignified fibres, inner most region show 2 to 3 la yers of parenchyma cell; seed coat shows 2 
rows of palisade like macrosclereids, linea lucida present in oute r layer; followed by a zone of thin walled 
parenchymatous cells, outer 2 to 3 layers thin walled and tangentiall y elongated cells, remaining cells circular to 
oval, lower parenchyma cells tangentially elongated and collapsed, s mall vascular bundles and vascular strands 
present; cotyledon shows thin walled parenchyma cells, most of them l oaded with aleurone and starch grains; 
starch grains simple, mostly oval with cleft shaped central hilum, measuring upt o 20 µ in length. 
 
Powder  –Shows fragments of epidermal cells with anomocytic and anisocytic stomata with covering and glandular 
trichomes, palisade like macrosclereids, parenchyma cells with starch and aleurone grains, bordered pitted 
tracheids and vessels, simple pitted parenchyma cells, thick wal led fibres, groups of radially elongated sclereids, 
isolated covering and glandular trichomes and palisade cells. 
 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH –  
Foreign matter    -  Not more than   2     per cent,     Appendix  2.2.2 
Total ash     -  Not more than 12     per cent,     Appendix  2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash                  -  Not more than   3     per cent,     Appendix  2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive   -  Not less than     9     per cent,     Appendix  2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive   - Not less than   14     per cent,     Appendix  2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. – 
 T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ precoated plate usi ng toluene: ethyl acetate: ethyl alcohol  
(7:1:2) as mobile phase , spots under UV 254 nm shows at R f. 0.81(pink), 0.51, 0.37 (both light blue), 0.63, 0.22, 
0.10 (all blue).  LXX  CONSTITUENTS -  Flavonoids, such as, quercetin, isoquercetin, kaempferol-3-glucoside, astr agalin, populnin, 
biochenin-A-7-glucoside, isorhamnetin, protensein, garbanzol and cyanogenic glycosides.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
Rasa          :    Ka ¾¢ ya, Lava ´a, Amla 
Gu ´´ ´´a            :    R ¦k¾a, Laghu 
V¤¤¤¤rya          :      ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka        :     Ka °u 
Karma        :     V ¢takara, Pittahara, Kaphahara, Vi ¾°ambh ¤, Balya, R ¦cikara, ¡dhm ¢nak ¢raka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Gandhaka Va °¤, Kravy ¢da Rasa, Canakamla, Canaka Saka, Canaka Gunah, 
¹u¾kabharjitaca ´akagu ´aª, Yusa Guna, Krisna Canaka Guna 
THERAPEUTIC USES - Annadrava º¦ la (Gastric ulccer), Chardi (Emesis), D āha (Burning sensation), Ivara, K āsa 
(Cough), P ¤nasa (Chronic rhinitis / sinusitis), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), ¹o¾a (Cachexia), ¹vāsa (Asthma), 
T¨¾´ ā (Thirst), Udara (Diseases of abdomen) 
 
DOSE -    C¦r´a: 5 to 20 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  LXXI  D¡¡ ¡¡RUHARIDR ¡¡ ¡¡ (Fruit) 
 
Drug consists of dried fruits of Berberis aristata DC. (Fam. Berberidaceae), an erect, glabrous, spinescent 
shrub found in the Himalayas between 2000 to 3000 m and also growing in Nilgiri hills. 
 
SYNONYMS –  D¢rvi, D ¢runis ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES  
 
Ben. :  Darhaldi, Daaruharidraa 
Eng. :  Indian barberry  
Guj. :  Daaruhaldar 
Hin. :  Daaruhaldi, Darhald, Zarishka (Fruit), Chitraa 
Mal. :  Maradarisina, Maramaanjal 
Mar. :  Daaruhalada 
Ori. :  Daaruhaldi 
Pun. :  Chitra, Kasmal, Simlu, Sumlu, Daarhaldi 
Tel. :  Manupasupu 
Urd. :  Zarishk 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a)  Macroscopic: 
 
 Young fruit bright red in colour but changes to blue black when mature, 10 to 12 mm long, 5 to 8 mm 
thick; ovoid; outer surface shows wrinkles when dried; seeds, 3 in ea ch fruit, about 6 mm long, 2 to 3 mm thick, 
ovoid, and somewhat flattended; characteristic odour present taste slightly bitt er. 
 
b)  Microscopic:  
 
Pericarp  -TS of fruit shows pericarp consists of  a single layer radially elongated, l ignified cells of epicarp covered 
with thick cuticle, mesocarp wide, composed of 20 to 25 layered parenchym atous cells; some prismatic and 
clusters of calcium oxalate crystals present in this region; endocarp parenchym atous, single layered. 
 
Seed -Testa shows two coats; outer coat comprising of 7 or 8 layers of l ignified cells; epidermis of the outer coat 
consists of elongated cells, followed by 6 to 7 layers of parenchymat ous cells; inner coat comprising of 4 to 6 
layers of compactly arranged thin walled cells containing starc h grains; individual starch grains simple to 
compound with 2 or 3 components, oval to spherical, variable in size, about 2 t o 7 µ in diameter with a centric 
hilum; embryo parenchymatous. 
 
Powder - Black-brown, taste slightly bitter; starch grains simple to c ompound with 2 or 3 components, oval to 
spherical variable in size; about 2 to 7  µ  in  diameter with a centric hilum, prismatic and clusters of calcium 
oxalate crystals; fibres; vessels reticulately thickened, t hin walled tracheids with some pits; surface view of testa; 
elongated cells of epidermis. 
  LXXII  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter   - Not more than      2   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash    - Not more than      7   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid -insoluble ash   - Not more than      1   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol -soluble extractive  - Not less than      13   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6 
Water–soluble extractive  - Not less than      14   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
 T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract of the drug on silica gel ‘G’ plate  using toluene : ethyl acetate  (90:10) 
shows spots at R f. 0.11, 0.23, 0.34, 0.46, 0.80 & 0.93 (all violet) on spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid 
reagent  and heating the plate for ten minutes at 105°. On spraying the plate with 5% methanolic sulphuric acid 
reagent  and heating for ten minutes at 105°, it shows spots at R f. 0.11, 0.28, 0.39, 0.66, 0.72 & 0.95 (all 
violet). On exposure to iodine vapors , spots appear at R f. 0.23, 0.30, 0.82 and 0.93 (all yellow).  
 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract of the drug on silica gel ‘G’ plate  using toluene : ethyl acetate : formic acid  
(50:15:5) shows  spots  i.e. one light yellow and one red in UV, in iodine  s pots at R f. 0.20, 0.49, 0.65, 0.75, 0.81, 
0.87, 0.93 and 0.99 all brown. On spraying with 10 % sulphuric acid  and heating the plate for 10 minutes at 105 o 
spots appear at R f. 0.12, 0.19, 0.26, 0.29, 0.35, 0.74, 0.83, 0.90 and 0.97.  
 
The alcoholic extract of the drug in solvent system chloroform: methanol: ammonia  (60:30:1) shows one 
greenish spot at R f. 0.94 in visible light. In UV yellow spots appear at R f. 0.15, 0.62, 0.80 and 0.96. On spraying 
with modified Dragendorff’s reagent , orange spots appear at R f. 0.87, 0.92 and 0.97.  
 
CONSTITUENTS – Alkaloids: Berberine, oxyberberine, berbamine, palmatine,   jatrorhizine, tet rahydropalmitine 
etc. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION –   
 
Rasa                       :   Madhur ¢mla  
Gu ´´ ´´a :   Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  ¹ita 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka :  Ka °u 
Karma :  Rucya, Pitta ºamana, Vi ¾°ambh ¤ 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- D¢rv ¤seka ª, D¢rv ¤svarasa ª, D ¢ruharidr ¢, Yavak ¾¢r¢diva °¤, 
Darvi Guna, Rasanjana GunaRasanjana Prayoga  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - ¡m¢tis ¢ra (Diarrhoea due to indigestion), Aruci (Tastelessness), H ¨ll ¢sa 
(Nausea), Jvara (Fever);  Pittaja-atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea due to Pitta dosa), Raktavikar ¢ (Disorders of 
blood), T ¨¾´¢ (Thirst), Vamana, Vi ¾avik ¢ra (Disorders due to poison), Yak ¨todara (Enlargement of 
liver (Hepatomegaly)   
 
DOSE-  C¦r´a (Powder) : 3 to 5 g.  
  LXXIII  DHAVA (Fruit) 
 
 Dhava consists of dried fruits of Anogeissus latifolia  Wall. (Fam. Combretaceae), a large to moderate sized 
tree common throughout India, in deciduous forests ascending upto 1350 m in the Hi malayas and in the South 
Indian Hills.  
 
SYNONYMS –  Gaura, Dhurandhara 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. :   Dhaauyaa gaachh 
Eng. :   Axle – wood 
Guj. :   Dhaavado 
Hin. :   Baakali, Dhauraa, Dhav, Dhaavaa 
Kan. :   Dinduge 
Mal. :   Vellanava, Malukkanniram 
Mar. :   Dhaavdaa, Dhaval 
Ori. :   Dhaau 
Tam. :   Vellanagai, Vellanamai 
Tel. :   Chirimaanu 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
a)  Macroscopic: 
 
 Fruit 5 to 6 mm long, 9 to 11 mm in diameter including 2 wings, coriace ous, compressed and packed 
horizontally into dense heads; containing 1-seed, 4 or 5 mm long, 7 or 8 mm i n diameter; characteristic odour, 
tasteless. 
 
b)  Microscopic: 
 
Pericarp  -Pericarp about 500 µ in depth shows two distinct regions: outer region is the epicarp havi ng thick 
sclereid with an outer thick cuticle, followed by 6 to 9 layers of thick walled, elongated cells of mesocarp; 
endocarp not distinct; prismatic and rosettes of calcium oxalate scattered in the  region of mesocarp. 
 
Seed  -Seed coat about 140 to 220 µ thick, comprise of 6 to 11 layers of thin walled, elongated and highly 
compressed parenchymatous cells; cells of the seed coat also conta in prismatic and rosette of calcium oxalate; 2 or 
3 layers of thin walled cells of endocarp present beneath the seed c oat followed by the embryo; cotyledons are 
composed of thin walled parenchymatous cells with brown pigment. 
 
Powder - Dark brown, odour specific, tasteless, characterized by the presence  of prisms and rosettes of calcium 
oxalate, sclereids, thick walled parenchymatous cells, thick wall ed fibres and vessels with bordered pits are present. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter   Not more than 2    per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash    Not more than 4    per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash   Not more than 0.1 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  Not less than 0.4   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6  LXXIV  Water–soluble extractive  Not less than 8      per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract of the drug on silica gel ‘G’ plate  using toluene : acetone : formic acid  (55: 
40: 5) under UV light 365 nm shows fluorescent zones at  R f. 0.72 and 0.78 (both greenish), on exposure to iodine 
vapour  spots appear at R f. 0.16, 0.21, 0.48, 0.56, 0.80, and 0.93 (all yellow). 
 
In toluene: ethyl acetate: formic acid  (40:25:04)  yellow colured spots appear in visible light. On spraying 
with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent   and heating for 10 minutes at at 105°, spots at  R f. value 0.19 (faint 
reddish), 0.23 (faint reddish), 0.30 (bluish black), 0.64 (reddish), 0.75 (reddish) 0.80 ( blackish ) and 0.92 (violet ).      
       
In toluene: ethyl acetate  (93:7) under UV 365 nm intense blue spot at R f. 0.36 appears. On spraying 
vanillin sulphuric acid reagent  and heating for 10 minutes at 105°, spots at R f. value 0.28 (violet), 0.33 (violet), 
0.43 (violet), 0.54 (violet), 0.60 (violet), 0.70 (violet), 0.78 (violet), and 0.83 (violet) appear. 
 
 CONSTITUENTS - Tannins, gallic acid, saponins, quercetin and myricetin. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa       :   Madhura, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a       :   R¦k¾a, Guru 
V¤¤¤¤rya       :   S¤ta 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka      :       Ka °u 
Karma      :   Pittahara, Kaphahara, R ¦cya, D ¤pana, V ¢takara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Dhavam ¦lagu ´a¢ª , Dhava Guna, Dhavaphalagu ´aª, Dhavagu ´aª, Dhava 
Phala Guna, Dhavagu ´a¢ª  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - Aºmar ¤ (Calculus), Ar śa (Piles), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), Medoroga (Obesity), P ¢´² u 
(Anaemia), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Raktav ¤k¢ra (Disorders of blood), Upada ¼ºa (Syphilis / soft chancre) 
 
DOSE- C¦r´a (Powder):   5 to 10 g. 
 
 
 
 
  LXXV  DHAVA (Stem Bark) 
 
 Dhava consists of dried stem bark of Anogeissus latifolia  Wall. (Fam. Combretaceae), a large to moderate 
sized tree common throughout India, in deciduous forests ascending upto 1350 m in the Himalayas and South 
Indian Hills.  
 
SYNONYMS –  Gaura, Dhurandhara  
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
  
Ben.              :     Dhaauyaa gaachh 
Eng.              :     Axle - wood 
Guj.               :     Dhaavado 
Hin.               :     Baakali, Dhauraa, Dhav, Dhaavaa 
Kan.              :     Dinduge 
Mal.              :     Vellanava, Malukkanniram 
Mar.              :     Dhaavdaa, Dhaval 
Ori.                :     Dhaau 
Tam.             :     Vellanagai, Vellanamai  
Tel.               :     Chirimaanu 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a)  Macroscopic: 
 
 Pieces of bark mostly about 4 to 6 cm long, 1.5 to 1.75 cm wide and 1 or 2 mm thick, hard, recurved, 
externally pale, fairly smooth having small ridges; inner surface pale brown, sm ooth but longitudinally striated; 
fracture clean; faint odour; taste, slightly bitter and astringent. 
 
b)  Microscopic: 
 
       Mature bark consists of an outer 7 to 9 radially arranged layers of cork cells, followed by 20 to 24 layers of 
parenchymatous thin walled cells of phelloderm, both regions containing pri smatic and rosette crystals of calcium 
oxalate; secondary phloem very wide and characterized by the occurre nce of numerous patches of sclereids, fibres, 
sieve tubes, companion cells and phloem parenchyma; crystals of calc ium oxalate and granules of starch grains 
also present in cells; starch grains circular in appearance with a centric hi lum and measure 6 to 13 µ. 
 
Powder - Light brown, taste bitter, shows circular starch grains measuring  6 to 13 µ, numerous prismatic and 
rosettes of calcium oxalate, phloem fibres both simple and septate, t hin walled, 155 to 200 µ long, 10 to 20 µ in 
width; thick walled fibres about 275 to 340 µ long, 9 to 20 µ in width with 6 to 11 µ wide lumen; sclereids of 
various shapes, measuring about 80 to 235 µ long and 25 to 75 µ wide, thin walled parenchymatous cells also 
present. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter   - Not more than 2  per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash    - Not more than11 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash   - Not more than 1  per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than 11  per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Water–soluble extractive  - Not less than 20  per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7  LXXVI   
T.L.C. – 
 
 T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract of the drug on silica gel ‘G’ plat e of 0.2 mm thickness using toluene: ethyl 
acetate  (93:7) under UV light 365 nm shows only one fluorescent zone at R f. 0.10 (greenish). On spraying with 
anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and heating the plate for 15 minutes at 105°,  spots appear at R f. 0.10 (black), 
0.20 (pink), 0.30 (green), 0..34 (blue), 0.40 (green)  0.44 (pink), 0.50 (blue), 0.56 (blue), 0.65 (bla ck), 0.73 (pink), 
0.86 (green), 0.93 (blue). 
 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract in solvent system toluene : ethyl acetate  (90:10) and  on spraying with 
vanillin sulphuric acid reagent  show  spots appearing at R f. 0.40 (violet), 0.58 (violet), 0.72 (brownish), 0.87 
(violet) and 0.98 (violet).  
 
CONSTITUENTS - Phenolic compounds such as ellagic acid, flavellagic acid, quercet in, myricetin and 
procyandin along with gallotannins, shikimic acid, quinic acid, amino acids, alanine and phenyl anine. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa      : Madhura, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Guna        : R¦k¾a, Guru  
V¤¤¤¤rya       : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka     : Ka °u 
Karma     : Pittahara, Kaphahara, Ras ¢yana, D ¤pana, Medoghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Ayask ¨ti, Nyagrodh ¢di C ¦r´a, Dhavam ¦lagu ´a¢ª , Dhava Guna, 
Dhavaphalagu ´aª, Dhavagu ´aª, Dhava Phala Guna, Dhavagu ´a¢ª  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES -  A ºmar ¤ (Calculus), Ar śa (Piles), Kar ´asr ¢va (Otorrhoea), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of 
skin), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), Medoroga (Obesity), P ¢´²u (Anaemia), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Raktav ¤k¢ra 
(Disorders of blood), Upada ¼ºa (Syphilis / soft chancre), Visarpa (Erysepales) 
 
DOSE - Kv ¢tha (Decoction): 30 to 50 ml. 
 
 
 
 
 
  LXXVII  DV ££££P¡¡ ¡¡NTARA DAMANAKA (Whole Plant) 
 
Dv ¤p¢ntara Damanaka  consists of the dried whole plant in flowering stage of Artemisia absinthium L. 
(Fam. Asteraceae), a herbaceous plant found in Kashmir and Nepal. 
 
SYNONYMS –  Ko ´¢k¢´d¢, Sugandhidru, ¹ira ªº¦lakar ¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES-  
 
Ben. :  Mastaru 
Eng. :  Worm wood, Absinth  
Guj. :  Mastaru 
Hin. :  Vilayati afsantin 
Kan. :  Titaveen, Vruvalu  
Mal. :  Nilampala, Tirunitripachcha 
Mar. :  Serpana 
Pun. :  Mastiyaaraa 
Tel. :  Moshipatri, Machipatri 
Urd. :  Afsanteen 
 
DESCRIPTION –  
 
a) Macroscopic:  
 
Stem –Usually unbranched, internodes 4 to 5 cm in length, 0.5 to 5 mm in thickness; surface pale brown, 
longitudinally furrowed, with attached petiole or its scar at the nodal region;  pubescent; fracture short and splintery 
in the bark, fractured surface yellowish; odour not characteristic; taste, bitt er.   
 
Leaf  –Crumpled and broken; measuring about 2 cm in length and 2 mm in breadth, eas ily getting detached from 
the stem; petiolate, ovate to obovate, pinnatifidly cut into 2 or 3 spre ading linear or lanceolate, obtuse segments, 
hairy on both sides, greyish green in colour and bitter in taste.  
 
Flower head –Pedunculate, borne on a hairy receptacle of 1.5 to 5 mm in dia.; ligulate  flower, many, yellow, 
heterogamous; stigma bilobed; stamens 5, anthers syngenicious; ray f lorets, a few, dilated below; involucre of 
bracts, oblong, hairy, narrowly scarious; achenes, flat, elliptic oblong and black in colour .  
 
b) Microscopic:  
 
Stem –Stem circular in outline, faintly elevated and furrowed at places , epidermis, covered with abundant 
trichomes of varying sizes and shapes; simple unicellular covering trichomes are 45 to 80 µ  in length, multicellular 
of 2 to 4 celled, 140 to 150 µ  in length; hooked or sickle shaped, 175 to 230 µ in length and ‘T’  shaped with uni 
or bicellular stalk, with spreading 245 to 250 µ long arms; glandular t richomes stalked, very short, measuring 2 to 
20 µ in length with multicellular head; cortex collenchymatous; endoderm is distinct, consisting of barrel shaped 
tangentially elongated, biconvex cells; pericycle, characterized by oval shaped well developed patches of lignified 
sclerenchyma usually lying above each of the vascular bundle; phloem very narrow, at places obliterated; xylem 
consisting of vessels, tracheids and thin walled fibres, vessels radially arranged, border pitted, annular or 
scalariform, and measure 230 to 240 µ in length and 20 to 35 µ in breadth; me dullary rays lignified, radially  LXXVIII  elongated, uni to triseriate, especially in older stem; pith wide, cells parenchymatous, pitted ant thick walled, 
secretory canals isolated and located towards the peripheral region of the pith.  
 
Leaf –Surface preparation of the leaf shows thick walled, slightly wav y, epidermal cells with faint striated cuticle 
and stomata of anomocytic type; trichomes plenty, identical with tha t of stem, ‘T’ shaped trichomes are maximum 
in number characterized with their long spreading arms measuring 295 to 350 µ in length, occasionally glandular 
trichomes appressed, with oval or bilobed heads. 
 
Powder – Pale yellowish-brown, extremely bitter in taste; with characte ristic bitterish odour; ‘T’ shaped trichomes 
of leaf and stem, are plenty; other characters are, uniseriate multicellular trichomes of leaf and bracts; wooly 
trichomes of ray florets; anomocytic type stomata of leaf; li gnified somewhat rectangular shaped anther cells; 
triangular pollen grains, thick walled pitted cells of pith and groups  of lignified fibres, and fragments of pitted and 
spirally thickened vessels of the stem.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTN – 
 
Foreign matter   -      Not more than      2     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2  
Total ash    -      Not more than    14     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash   -      Not more than      7     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive -      Not more than      5     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive -      Not more than    11     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7  
Volatile oil    -      Not more than    0.1    per cent,   Appendix   2.2.10 
 
Chemical Test – Take a small portion of alcohol extract with chloroform and add aceti c anhydride followed by 
conc. sulphuric acid drop wise. Violet colour is produced.  
 
T.L.C. –  
 
T.L.C. of the volatile oil on silica gel ‘G’ plate (0.2 mm thick) using toluene:ethyl acetate  (93:7) under UV 
366 nm shows fluorescent spots at R f. 0.47, 0.64, 0.70 and 0.82. On exposure to iodine vapour , spots appear at R f. 
0.28, 0.31, 0.35, 0.41, 0.55, 0.75 and 0.86.   
 
CONSTITUENTS  –Volatile oil (which contain α-pinene, β-pinene, β-phellandrene, thujone, azulene, sabinyl 
acetate, etc.) bitter principle absinthin, iso-absinthin. 
 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -  
Rasa : Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a, T ¤k¾´a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : ¡rtavajanana, D ¤pana, Kaphahara, K ¨mighna, M ¦trala, ¹othahara,    
  Sugandhi, V ¢tahara, Vedan ¢sth ¢pana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Agnim āndya (Digestive impairment), Apasm ¢ra (Epilepsy), J ¤r´ajvara 
(Chronic fever), Jalodara (Ascites), K ¨mi (Worm infestation), Ka ¾°¢ rtava (D ysmenorrhoea),  LXXIX  Kar ´aº¦la (Otalgia), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), Pak ¾¢ gh ¢ta (Paralysis / Hemiplegia), Pl ¤h¢roga 
(Splenic disease), Sandhi ºotha (Arthritis), ¹otha (Inflammation), Udararoga (Diseases of abdomen), 
V¢taroga (Disease due to Vata dosa), Yak ¨t roga (Liver disorder) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 1 to 2 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  LXXX  DV ££££P¡¡ ¡¡NTARA ¹¹ ¹¹AT ¡¡ ¡¡VAR ££££ (Root) 
 
 Dv ¤p¢ntara ¹at ¢var ¤ consists of dried roots of Asparagus officinalis L. (Fam. Liliaceae), a shrub found in 
Europe and America, introduced in India and successfully cultivated at  higher elevations in Kashmir and also in 
parts of plains. 
 
SYNONYMS -  S ¦cigucch ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES-  
 
Ben. : Hikua, Hillua 
Eng. : Asparagus, Sperage 
Hin. : Halyun  
Mar. : Halyun 
Urd. : Haliyoon 
 
DESCRIPTION –  
 
a) Macroscopic:  
 
 The root occurs in small pieces, 2 to 6 cm long and 0.2 to 0.5 cm thick; s urface rough due to longitudinal 
wrinkles, root hairs and scars; creamish white externally and pal e white internally; fracture hard and fibrous; odour, 
rancid, taste, disagreeable.  
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
 TS consists of an outer cuticle and a single layer of epiblema, c ells polygonal; unicellular hairs present; 
below epidermis 3 or 4 rows of cork cells; cortical tissue consis ts of parenchymatous cells, more or less circular in 
outline with small intercellular spaces, and several cells show  the presence of raphides; endodermal cells possess 
casparian strips on their radial walls; xylem bundles arranged in radial rows alternately with phloem and consists of 
vessels and tracheids; pith cells parenchymatous with a large number of interce llular spaces.  
 
Powder – Cream coloured, shows under microscope, cortical parenchyma with raphides ; vessels with simple cross 
wall performation plates, numerous small and large pits on the wall s; tracheids lignified elongated and pointed with 
annular thickenings; fibres elongated and pointed at both the ends.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter   -  Not more than     1      per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2  
Total ash    -  Not more than   10      per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash   -  Not more than   2.5     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive -  Not less than       9      per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive -  Not less than    24       per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. –  
 
T.L.C. of methanolic extract of the drug on a precoated silica gel ‘ G’ plate, using chloroform: methanol: 
water (65:35:10), on spraying with Libermann – Burchard reagent and heating the pla te for about five minute at 
105 o show, spots at R f. 0.65 & 0.50 (both light brown) and 0.24 (light yellow).   LXXXI   
CONSTITUENTS – Saponin glycosides, β-sitosterol, saccharopine, 2-aminoadipic acid, asparagusic acid, 
dihydroasparagusic acid, S-acetyl dihydroasparagusic acid, spirostanol glucoside, sarsasapogenin glycoside, 
asparasaponin I and asparasaponin II and nine steroid glucosides named as asparagosides A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H 
and I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Snigdha, Guru 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Madhura 
Karma : H ¨dya, M ¦trala, Pittahara, V ¨¾ya, V ¢j¤kara ´a 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS -  Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES -  A ºmar ¤ (Calculus), Kāmal ā (Jaundice), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), 
¹otha (Inflammation), V ¢tararakta (Gout) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder) : 3 to 6 g.  LXXXII  ELAV ¡¡ ¡¡LUKAM (Root)  
 
Elav ¢lukam consists of roots of Prunus avium L. (Fam. Rosaceae), a small tree with fascicled white 
flowers which appear along with the new leaves.  The wild form of this spe cies is often used as a stock for grafting 
cultivated varieties of cherry. The plant is found in Kashmir, Kumaon and Himachal Pr adesh. 
 
SYNONYMS - ¡luka, V ¢luka, Eluka 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. : Elavaaluka 
Eng. : Sweet Cherry  
Hin. : Alubukhara, Aluvaalu, Gilaas, Aalubaalu  
Kan. : Chary hannu 
Ori. : Mitha cherry 
Pun. : Alubukhara 
Tel. : Cherychettu, Alubakraapandu 
Urd. : Alubalu, Alubukhara 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
a)  Macroscopic :   
 
Root knotty and irregular, tortuous, with a dark grey bark up to 3.5 mm t hick and transversely elongated 
brown lenticels; wood hard, yellow inside, yellowish-orange on the outer s mooth surface;  fracture, irregular, 
splintery;  odour  and taste not distinctive. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
 Transverse section through the root shows a rather diffuse wood stru cture showing small isolated vessels, 
60 to 70 µ in diameter, and abundant fibres; vessels mostly show simple  to bordered pits and have simple 
perforations; fibres present in large groups and sometimes having f ine septa; parenchyma rare and if present, 
diffused or scattered; rays 1 to 4 seriate, several cell high, parenchymatous, made of rectangular cells possessing 
starch grains. 
 
Powder – Light brown, coarse and fibrous; taste and odour not distinct; powder micros copy shows vessels with 
simple and bordered pits, fibres in isolation or in groups, fragments of tissue showing ray parenchyma cells and 
fibres.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH –  
 
Foreign matter   - Not more than  2    per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash    - Not more than  8    percent,    Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash   - Not more than  1    per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than    7    per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than    5    per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7 
 
  LXXXIII  T.L.C. – 
 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on pre-coated silica gel ‘G’ F 254 plate using mobile phase chloroform: 
methanol  (8:2), on spraying the plate with NP/PEG reagent,  shows  spots at  R f. 0.09 (pink), 0.23 (fluorescent 
spot), 0.39 (reddish brown), 0.46 (fluorescent spot), 0.64 (violet) and 0.87 (orange) at 366 nm.  
 
CONSTITUENTS –  D-mandelonitril- β- glucoside (prunasin) .  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION- 
 
Rasa : Ka ¾¢ ya, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta  
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma 
 : Kaphahara, Pittahara, ¹ukra ºodhana, Vedan ¢sth ¢pana, Vamana 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Evavaluka Guna, Elav ¢luka ª, Balukam Guna, Balukam 
Phalam Guna, Elav ¢lukagu ´a¢h, Valukam(Trapusa Visesa) Guna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Ar ºa (Piles), Aruci (Tastelessness), K ¨mi roga (Worm infestation), 
Ka ´² u (Itching), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of skin), Vra ´a (Ulcer), M ¦tra roga (Urinary 
diseases), Rakta-pitta (Bleeding disorder) 
 
DOSE-  C ¦r´a ( Powder): 1 to 3 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  LXXXIV  ELAV ¡¡ ¡¡LUKAM (Stem Bark) 
 
Elav ¢lukam consists of stem bark of Prunus avium L. (Fam. Rosaceae), a small tree with fascicled white 
flowers which appear along with the new leaves.  The wild form of this spe cies is often used as a stock for grafting 
cultivated varieties of cherry. The plant is found Kashmir, Kumaon and Himachal Pra desh. 
 
SYNONYMS - ¡luka, V ¢luka, Eluka 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. : Elavaaluka 
Eng. : Sweet Cherry  
Hin.  : Aluvaalu, Gilaas, Aalubaalu, Alubukhara 
Kan. : Chary hannu 
Ori. : Mitha cherry 
Pun. : Alubukhara 
Tel. : Cherychettu, Alubakraapandu 
Urd. : Alubalu, Alubukhara 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
 
a) Macroscopic : 
 
Bark up to 3.5 mm in thickness, rough, dark grey outside, smooth and orange i nside; usually exfoliating in 
2 layers- outer thin greyish layer which recurves transversel y on removal and forms a quill or a double quill, and 
the inner greenish yellow, thicker layer which remains straight  or curved; lenticels scattered, elongated, spindle or 
oval shaped, transversely oriented, having a central slit and rais ed upper and lower margins, brown; stem bark may 
sometimes be associated with foliose lichens of greenish light g rey colour; fracture, short, fibrous; odour, sharp; 
taste, bitter. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
The bark in transverse section often shows small layers of cork cells peeling  off in a recurved manner from 
many layered corky tissue which is subtended by a few layers of clear, rectangular, thin walled cells of cork 
cambium; 2 to 3 layers of secondary cortex inner to cork cambium have  highly flattened, tangentially elongated 
cells; secondary cortex  parenchymatous, with circular or elongated cells; groups of small and large, usually up to 
35 µ size stone cells and occasionally, rosettes of calcium oxalate c rystals up to 30 µ, are scattered in the secondary 
cortex; cortex and phloem also have single or groups of characteristi c thick walled, long, straight or tortuous, 
branched and un-branched fibres; the medullary rays ran out into the secondary cortex to form f unnel like patches. 
 
Powder – Brown, coarse, fibrous and fluffy, taste bitter; odour not distinct; mic roscopy shows characteristic thick 
walled, long, straight or tortuous, branched and un- branched fibres, and groups of cork cells. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH –  
Foreign matter                         -    Not more than    1    per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash             -    Not more than    7    per cent,  Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash                     -    Not more than 0.5    per cent,  Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive           -    Not less than    11    per cent,  Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive            -    Not less than     9     per cent,  Appendix 2.2.7  LXXXV   
T.L.C. –  
 
 T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ F 254 plate using mobile phase butanone: ethyl acetate: 
acetic acid: water (3:5:1:1), on spraying the plate with NP/PEG reagent, shows spots  at  R f. 0.44 and 0.53 (both 
fluorescent blue) and at R f. 0.82 (dark zone) at 366 nm. 
 
CONSTITUENTS –  D-mandelonitril- β-glucoside (prunasin), D-mandelonitrile- β-gentiobioside 
dehydrowogonin 7-glucoside and chrysin 7-glucoside are main components .  Tectochrysin, apigenin 5-glucoside, 
genkwanin 5-glucoside and neosakuranine are the minor components. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION- 
 
Rasa : Ka ¾¢ ya, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta  
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma   Kaphahara, Pittahara, ¹ukra ºodhana,Vamana, Vedan ¢sth ¢pana  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Evavaluka Guna, Elav ¢luka ª, Balukam Guna, Balukam 
Phalam Guna, Elav ¢lukagu ´a¢h, Valukam(Trapusa Visesa) Guna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES-  Ar ºa (Piles), Aruci (Tastelessness), H ¨droga (Heart disease), Ka ´² u 
(Itching), K ¨mi (Worm infestation), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of skin), M ¦tra roga (Urinary 
diseases), Rakta-pitta (Bleeding disorder), Vra ´a (Ulcer)   
 
DOSE -  C ¦r´a ( Powder): 1 to 3 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  LXXXVI  ERA ³± ³± ³± ³± AKARKA ¯£¯£ ¯£¯£    (Fruit) 
Era ´²akarka °¤ consists of dried pericarp of mature and unripe fruits of Carica papaya  L. (Fam. 
Caricaceae), a small, fast growing  tree, cultivated throughout India for its fruits and latex, which is a commercial 
source of enzyme papain. 
 
SYNONYMS -  Mdhukarka °¤, Gop ¢lakarka °¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben.               :     Papeyaa, Pappiyaa 
Eng.               :     Papaya, Melon tree, Pawpaw 
Guj.               :     Erandakaakadi, Papaiyu, Papita 
Hin.               :     Papitaa 
Kan.               :     Pirangi, Pappaay 
Mal.              :     Karmaasu, Pappaay, Karumatti 
Mar.              :     Papaayaa, Papai 
Pun.              :     Erandakharbujaa 
Tam.             :     Pappali 
Tel.               :     Boppayi, Bobbaasi, Paringi 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
a) Macroscopic: 
 Pericarp of fruit in pieces measuring upto 6 cm in length, 1.5 cm in w idth and 1 to 2 mm. thick; surface 
shrunken, epicarp portion dark greenish-brown, mesocarp cream to yellowis h brown, leathery, odour characteristic; 
taste, bitter and mucilagenous.  
b) Microscopic: 
  Epicarp shows single layer of thin walled cells covered externally with thi ck cuticle; mesocarp a wide zone 
consisting of circular to oval parenchyma cells with scattered vascular bundles and unbranched laticiferous ducts, 
endocarp 2 or 3 layers of compact thin walled parenchyma cells; some  of the parenchyma cells of mesocarp 
contain rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals. 
Powder - Shows fragments of parenchyma cells with adjoining laticiferous duct s, parenchyma cells containing 
rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals, scalariform and spiral xylem vessels, parenchyma cells with overlapping 
vessels, epidermal cells with anomocytic and anisocytic stomata  and a few scattered rosettes of calcium oxalate 
crystals. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH –   
Foreign matter   -  Not more than   2   per cent,    Appendix  2.2.2  
Total ash   -  Not more than  14  per cent,    Appendix  2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash   - Not more than  0.5  per cent,    Appendix  2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive   -  Not less than    2     per cent,    Appendix  2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive   -  Not less than    25   per cent,    Appendix  2.2.7  
 
T.L.C. - 
  LXXXVII  T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate using  toluene: ethyl acetate: acetic acid: 
methanol  (4.5:1:0.7:0.3) as mobile phase, on spraying the plate with ethanolic sulphuric acid  (10%) reagent  and 
heating at 110 o for 10 minutes spots appear at R f. 0.14,0.45,0.51,0.70, 0.75 and 0.80 and 0.23  (blue).  
 
CONSTITUENTS - β-carotene, papain, carpaine. 
 
PROPERTIES  AND ACTION -  
Rasa        :   Tikta, Madhura  
Gu ´´ ´´a      :   Laghu  
V¤¤¤¤rya      :   U ¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka   :   Madhura 
Karma   :   Pittahara, Kaphahara, D ¤pana, V ¢takara, Stanya,   
                   H ¨dya, B ¨¼ ha ´a 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Pakvav ¢takumbhagu ´¢ª , V ¢takumbhagu ´¢ª  
THERAPEUTIC USES - K¨mi (Worm infestation), K āsa (Cough), Raktav ¤k¢ra (Disorders of blood), Śvāsa 
(Asthma), V ¢tararakta (Gout)  
DOSE  -  C ¦r´a (Powder): 10 to 20 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  LXXXVIII  ERA ³± ³± ³± ³± AKARKA ¯£¯£ ¯£¯£ (Root) 
Era ´² akarka °¤ consists of dried roots of Carica papaya  L. (Fam.Caricaceae), a small fast growing tree, 
cultivated throughout India for its fruits and for latex, which is a c ommercial source of the enzyme papain, 
extracted from it.  
SYNONYMS - Mdhukarka °¤, Gop ¢lakarka °¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben.               :    Papeyaa, Pappiyaa 
Eng.               :    Papaya, Melon tree, Pawpaw 
Guj.               :    Erandakaakadi, Papaiyu, Papita 
Hin.               :    Papitaa 
Kan.               :    Pirangi, Pappaay 
Mal.              :    Karmaasu, Pappaay, Karumatti 
Mar.              :    Papaayaa, Papai 
Pun.              :    Erandakharbujaa 
Tam.             :     Pappali 
Tel.               :     Boppayi, Bobbaasi, Paringi 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
a)  Macroscopic: 
  Roots cylindrical, in cut pieces upto 10 cm. long and 1.5 cm. thick; surfac e pale brown with longitudinal 
wrinkles and scars of rootlets; fracture, short and horny; odour and taste indistinct. 
b)   Microscopic: 
  Root shows narrow cork consisting of rectangular and tangentially el ongated cells; phellogen single 
layered, phelloderm consists of tangentially elongated parenchyma ce lls, some of them containing rosettes of 
calcium oxalate crystals; phloem consists of sieve tubes, companion cells, phloem parenchyma and fibres; both 
xylem and phloem are traversed by multiseriate medullary rays;  vessels show reticulate thickening except vessels 
all the xylem elements are thin walled and non-lignified. 
Powder -Powder shows thin walled parenchyma cells, some of them containing rosette of ca lcium oxalate crystals, 
fragments of cork cells, fibres with solid tapering or blunt ends and vessels with r eticulate thickenings. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
 
Foreign matter  :   Not more than 2      per cent,   Appendix  2.2.2  
Ash value    :  Not more than 18    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.3 
Acid  Insoluble ash  :   Not more than 1.5   per cent,   Appendix  2.2.4  
Alcohol soluble extractive :  Not less than 3.0     per cent,   Appendix  2.2.6 
Water soluble extractive :  Not less than 15.0   per cent,   Appendix  2.2.7  
 
T.L.C. -  
T.L.C. of alcololic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’  plate us ing toluene: ethyl acetate: methanol: acetic 
acid  (4:5:2:0:2) as mobile phase,  on spraying the plate with ethanolic sulphuric acid  (10%) reagent  and heating at 
110 o for 10 minutes; spots appear at R f. 0.17,0.27,0.64,0.70, and 0.74.  LXXXIX   
CONSTITUENTS - Carpesanine, carpaine. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
Rasa             :  Ka °u, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a              :  Laghu, R ¦k¾a, T ¤k¾´ a 
V¤¤¤¤rya              :  U ¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka            :  Ka °u 
Karma            :  Kaphahara, M ¦trala 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Aºmar ¤haraka ¾¢ ya C ¦r´a, Pakvav ¢takumbhagu ´¢ª , V ¢takumbhagu ´¢ª  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES -  A ºmar ¤ (Calculus), Ar śa (Piles), Aruci (Tastelessness), K ¨mi roga (Worm infestation), 
Mutraroga (Urinery diseases), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), R aktapradara (Menorrhagia or metrorrhagia or both), 
Tvak roga (Skin diseases), Udara º¦ la (Pain in the abdomen), V ¢tararakta (Gout), Vra ´a (Ulcer)   
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 2 to 6 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  XC GANDHA ¹¹ ¹¹IPH ¡¡ ¡¡ (Whole Plant) 
 
Gandha ºiph ¢ consists of the whole plant of Pavonia odorata  Willd. (Fam. Malvaceae), a pubescent herb 
found in the plains of India. 
 
SYNONYMS – Picchila loma ºaª 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. : Sugandha-bala 
Guj. : Kalowalo 
Hin. : Sugandha-bala 
Kan. : Balarakkasi-gidaa 
Mal. : Kuruntotti 
Mar. : Kaalaavaalaa 
Tam. : Peramutti  
Tel. : Chitti benda  
 
DESCRIPTION - 
a) Macroscopic: 
Root  –Pale brown, well developed, with lateral roots upto 0.75 cm in thickness, length variable, no c haracteristic 
odour; taste, slightly bitter. 
 
Stem  –Green in colour, slightly hairy, variable in length and thickness; leaves intact , no characteristic odour; taste, 
slightly bitter. 
 
Leaf  –Petiole upto 5 cm long with prominent midrib on both surfaces; leaf 2.5 to 5 cm long, roundish cordate, 3 to 
5 lobed, lobes acute, distantly toothed, hairy on both surfaces, mildly aromatic, taste bitt er. 
 
b) Microscopic : 
Root  –Outer cork crushed, inner cork 5 or 6 layered, cells rectangular, ta ngentially elongated; cortex 
parenchymatous, inner one or 2 layers discontinuously collenchymatous; groups of sclereids scattered in the cortex; 
endodermis indistinct; pericyclic fibres present; xylem consists of circular vessels and lignified parenchyma; 
uniseriate and multiseriate rays present; pith absent; druses and simple as well as compound starch grains present in 
all the regions. 
 
Stem  –Epidermis single layered; cuticle present; unicellular slightl y curved trichome present; cortex consists of 2 
or 3 layers of hypodermal parenchyma followed by 1 or 2 layers of coll enchyma with remaining 1 or 2 layers of 
parenchymatous cells; inner region of cortex showed alternating scle reids and fibres; endodermis indistinct; 
pericyclic fibres present; stele shows phloem and solitary, medium  sized, many circular vessels embedded in 
lignified parenchyma; uniseriate or multiseriate rays filled with s tarch grains present; pith parenchymatous; druses, 
abundant particularly in phloem and simple as well as compound starch gr ains present throughout the ground 
tissues. 
  XCI  Leaf – 
 
Petiole – Circular in outline; epidermal cells single layered with cuti cle; cortex consists of 1 or 2 layers of 
hypodermal chlorenchyma followed by 2 or 3 layers of collenchyma and 2 or 3 layers of parenchyma cells; 
isolated, collateral vascular bundles arranged in a circle, each capped by sclerenchyma; druses present in the 
phloem region; xylem vessels circular with lignified parenchyma;  pith parenchymatous; simple and compound 
starch grains present throughout the cortex and pith. 
 
Midrib – Shows a protrusion on the adaxial side and a hemispherical projection on the  abaxial side; epidermis 
single layered with cuticle; stellate hair as well as unis eriate, multicellular trichomes upto 14 cells in length with 
conical tip, and unicellular trichomes present on both sides; hypodermal l ayer consists of 2 to 4 layers of 
collenchyma cells; rest of the region parenchymatous; 4 or 5 big muc ilage cells present on both the adaxial and 
abaxial side; collateral crescent shaped median vascular bundle pre sent, showing xylem towards adaxial and 
phloem on abaxial side; druses present in the phloem region. 
 
Lamina – Dorsiventral; epidermis single layered with cuticle; palisade  parenchyma single layered; 2 or 3 layers of 
spongy parenchyma cells present; mucilage cells present in the m esophyll region; stomata anomocytic on both 
surfaces; cell walls wavy; stomatal number 10 to 15 / mm 2 on adaxial epidermis, 30 to 35 / mm 2 on abaxial 
epidermis; stomatal index  9 to 11 for adaxial epidermis and 15 to 17 for abaxial epidermis; palisade  ratio 8 to 10; 
veinlet termination number 10 to 15; vein islet number 10 to 12. 
 
Powder – Brown, stellate, unicellular as well as uniseriate multicellul ar trichomes as described above present, 
druses 10 to 40 µ in size; starch grains simple and compound, individual st arch grains measuring 5 to 10 µ in 
diameter; length of fibres 300 to 700 µ; and cork cells also seen.  
  
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
 
Foreign matter   - Not more than   2  per cent,   Appendix  2.2.2 
Total ash    - Not more than   9  per cent,   Appendix  2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash   - Not more than   2  per cent,   Appendix  2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than     4  per cent,   Appendix  2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than     9  per cent,   Appendix  2.2.7 
Fixed oil    - Not less than     4  per cent,   Appendix  2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
 T.L.C. of chloroform extract on aluminium plate precoated with silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  of 0.2 mm thickness 
using toluene : ethyl acetate  (5:1.5) under UV 254 nm shows  spots at R f. 0.18, 0.22, 0.40, 0.64, 0.71, 0.76, 0.80 
and 0.87 (all green). Under UV 366 nm fluorescent zones appear at R f. 0.18 (blue), 0.22, 0.31, 0.38, 0.44, 0.58 (all 
pink), 0.64 (blue), 0.73, 0.80 (both pink) and 0.93 (blue). On exposure to iodine vapour  spots appear at R f. 0.54, 
0.71 and 0.77 (all brown).  On dipping the plate in vanillin-sulphuric acid reagent  and on heating at 105° for 5 
minutes  spots appear at R f. 0.15, 0.18 (both grey), 0.24 (violet), 0.43, 0.52, 0.62, 0.67 (all grey), 0.75 (yellow) 0.83 
(green) and 0.94 (blue).  
 
CONSTITUENTS – β–sitosterol; palmitic, stearic, oleic, linoleic, isovaleric and n-caproic  
acids; α- pinene and methyl eptenone, isovalaraldehyde, aromadendrin, azulene, pavonene,  
pavonenol . 
 
 
 
  XCII   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa : Tikta 
 
Rasa  Tikta  
Gu ´´ ´´a : R ¦k¾a, Laghu, Sugandhi 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹ita 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma 
 : Balya, D ¤pana, Jvaraghna, Kaphahara, Ke ºya, M ¦trala, P ¢cana,   
  Pittahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATION – Hrivera Guna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - Aruci (Tastelessness), Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), Chardi (Emesis), D ¢ha (Burning sensation), 
H¨droga (Heart disease), H ¨ll ¢sa (Nausea), Jvara (Fever), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of skin), Raktapitta (Bleeding 
disorder), ¹vitra (Leucoderma / Vitiligo), T ¨¾´¢ (Thirst), Visarpa (Erysepales), Vra ´a (Ulcer)  
 
DOSE-  C¦r´a (Powder):  3 to 6 g.  XCIII  GR £½ £½ £½ £½ MACHATRAKA (Whole Plant) 
 
  Gr ¤¾ machatraka consists of dried whole plant of Mollugo cerviana Seringe (Fam. Aizoaceae), an erect, 
slender annual, upto 20.0 cm high, found in dry and sandy areas commonly in Indian plains. 
 
SYNONYMS –  U ¾´ asundara  
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
Root - Tap root yellow, thin, cylindrical and brittle. 
Stem  – Branched, branches arises from the node, nodes upto 18 mm thick nodal distance of the  stem ranges from 4 
to 5.0 cm.  
 
Leaf -Radical leaves present, tufted, linear-spathulate or obovate; cauli ne leaves, in whorls of 4 to 8 at each node of 
the branches, linear oblong or subspathulate. 
 
Flower  - Numerous in cymes; pedicel long filiform; perianth small, oval to oblong, obtuse with membrenous 
margin; stamens 3 to 5; ovary globose, 3 to 5 celled; style very small; capsule as long as perianth, globose with 
many pink or yellowish seeds.  
 
b) Microscopic: 
 Root  – TS root wavy in outline, epidermal cells vary in size and covere d by a thin cuticle; cortex 4 to 5 cells deep, 
cells parenchymatous, laterally compressed without intercellular spaces; endodermis distinct, single layered of 
barrel-shaped parenchymatous cells; cells of pericycle smaller  than endodermis; followed by 3 or 4 cells deep 
phloem; cambium 3 or 4 cells deep; xylem consists of vessels, tracheids, fibres and par enchyma.  
 
Stem  – TS stem circular in outline; exhibits a thin cuticle covering the  single layered epidermis followed by a 
parenchymatous hypodermis; cortex 5 to 8 cells deep, sclerenchymatous wi th narrow lumen; in the stelar region, 
alternate rings of phloem and xylem separated by 1 or 2 layered cam bium; phloem narrow 2 or 3 cells deep and 
consists of sieve tubes, companion cells and phloem parenchyma; xylem c onsists of vessels, tracheids and fibres,  
the central portion occupied by sclerenchymatous pith. 
 
Leaf  – TS of leaf consists of a single layered large rectangular upper and lower epidermis, covered with thin 
cuticle, interrupted by unicellular thick walled, lignified trichome s followed by single layered palisade cells on 
both the surfaces; in surface view the epidermal cells sinuous; s tomata a few, anisocytic and paracytic present on Ben. :   Ghimasak 
Hin. :   Jimasaka 
Kan. :   Parpataka 
Mal. :   Parpatakapullu 
Mar. :   Pada 
Ori. :   Pitta Sag 
Tam. :   Parpadangam 
Tel. :   Parpatakamu  XCIV  lower side; spongy parenchyma 4 or 5 cells deep, cells angular; the whole leaf consists of 9 amphicribral vascular 
bundles, one in the midrib which is large and oval, while others smalle r located in the mesophyll; all vascular 
bundles surrounded with a single layer of chlorenchymatous bundle sheath; xyl em and phloem consists of usual 
elements.   
 
 Powder – Powder greenish brown, microscopical examination shows, patches of wavy epidermal cells with 
stomata; parenchymatous cells of hypodermis; sclerenchymatous cell wi th narrow lumen of cortex, tracheids; thick 
walled, lignified, unicellular trichomes; many small oval shaped y ellowish brown coloured seeds; very minute, 
tricolpate pollen grains and groups of fibres.       
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
 
Foreign matter  - Not more than 2    per cent,    Appendix 2.2.2  
Total ash   -  Not more than 9.5 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -  Not more than 4   per cent,    Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive -  Not less than 10   per cent,    Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive -  Not less than 14   per cent,    Appendix 2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. –  
 
        T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate  (0.2 mm thick) using ethyl acetate : formic 
acid : acetic acid : water    (10:1:1:2) shows spots at R f. 0.13, 0.19, 0.27, 0.31, 0.39 and 0.47 under UV 254 nm. On 
spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid reagent and heating the plate at 105 o for 10 minutes, spots appear at R f. 
0.11 (blue), 0.19 (blue), 0.24 (green), 0.37 (blue), and 0.46 (yellow). 
 
CONSTITUENTS –  Flavonoid: orientin, vitexin and their 2´- O-glucosides. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa :  Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a :  Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka :  Ka °u 
Karma :  D ¤pana, Jvaraghna, T ¨¾´¢ hara, Virecana 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Used as single drug 
  
THERAPEUTIC USES -  Agnim āndya (Digestive impairment), Jvara (Fever),  D ¢ha (Burning 
sensation), Kāmal ā (Jaundice), Prameha (Metabolic disorder)  
  
DOSE - C ¦r´a (Powder):  3 to 6 g.  XCV GOK ½½ ½½URA (Whole Plant) 
        Gok ¾ura consists of dried whole plant of Tribulus terrestris L. (Fam. Zygophyllaceae), an annual, rarely 
perennial, prostrate herb and a common weed of the pasture lands, roadsides  and other waste lands, chiefly 
growing in hot, dry and sandy regions throughout India and upto 3,000 m in Kashmir. 
SYNONYMS – Gok ¾uraka, K ¾uraka, Trika ´°aka, Sv ¢duka ´°aka, ¹vada ¼¾tr¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANUAGE NAMES-  
 
Ass. : Gokshura, Gokshuraka 
Ben. : Gokshur, Gokhuree 
Eng. : Small caltrops, Land caltrops, Puncture vine 
Guj. : Nhana gokhru, Bethagokhru 
Hin. : Gokhru, Chhotaagokshru, Hathichikar 
Kan. : Neggilumullu, Neglu 
Mal. : Nerunji 
Mar. : Sarate, Kate gokhru 
Ori. : Gakhura, Gokshra, Gokharaa 
Pun. : Bhakhada, Bhakhar 
Tam. : Nerinzil, Nerunjee 
Tel. : Palleru  
Urd. : Khar-e-khasak khurd 
DESCRIPTION - 
a) Macroscopic: 
Root  - Cut pieces 7 to 18 cm long and 0.3 to 0.7 cm in diameter, slender, cylindric al, fibrous, frequently branched 
bearing a number of small rootlets, tough, woody and yellow to light brown in colour; surface becomes rough due 
to presence of small nodules; fracture, fibrous; odour, aromatic; taste, sweet and as tringent. 
Stem  - Stem pieces cylindrical, distinct into nodes and internodes measuring about 1 to 5 cm in length and 0.5 to 2 
cm in thickness; surface rough, creamish white to light yellow e xternally; transversely cut smooth surface is light 
yellow towards periphery and creamish white in the centre; fract ure short, fibrous; odour, unpleasant; taste, 
mucilaginous. 
Leaf  - Leaves paripinnately compound, leaflets in 3 to 7 pairs, commonly 5 pa irs; each leaflet oblong with 
mucronate tip, entire margin, and short petiole, about 1.5 cm long and 0.3 to 0.5 c m broad; upper surface greyish-
green and lower surface light green, appressed with dense white hai rs; margin entire; odour not distinct, taste, 
slightly bitter. 
Fruit  - Fruit  stalked, light or greenish-yellow, five-ribbed or angled, more or less  spherical in structure and covered 
with short stiff or pubescent hairs, 1 cm in diameter with five pa irs, of prominent short stiff spines, pointed 
downwards, about 0.5 cm in length; tips of spines almost meet in pairs, w hole together forming pentagonal frame-
work around fruit; ripe fruit separates into five segments of ea ch cocci and each appears as single-fruit, each coccus 
semi-lunar or plano-convex in structure, one chambered, armed with a pair  of spines, starting from its middle, 
containing four or more seeds; taste, slightly astringent. 
 
  XCVI  b) Microscopic: 
Root  - TS of primary root show a layer of epidermis followed by 4 to 5  layers of thin-walled parenchymatous 
cortex, endodermis distinct; pericycle enclosing diarch stele, in ma ture root, cork 4 to 6 layered, cork cambium 
single layered followed by 6 to 14 layers of thin-walled parenchymat ous cells with varying number of fibres, 
distributed throughout; some secondary cortex cells show secondary wall formation and reticulate thickening; 
fibres found in groups resembling those of phloem; secondary phloem divided i nto two zones, outer zone 
characterized by presence of numerous phloem fibres with a few sie ve tubes slightly collapsed, inner zone 
frequently parenchymatous, devoid of fibres often showing sieve tubes and companion cells; phloem rays distinct, 
a few cells get converted into fibres in outer region; cambium 3 t o 5 layered; wood composed of vessels, tracheids, 
parenchyma and fibres and transversed by medullary rays; vessels  scattered, arranged in singles or double towards 
inner side, in groups of three to four on outer side having bordered pits; tracheids long, narrow with simple pits; 
xylem parenchyma rectangular or slightly elongated with simple pi ts and reticulate thickening; xylem fibres a few; 
tracheids elongated with simple pits; medullary rays heterogeneous , 1 to 4 cells wide; starch grains and rosette 
crystals of calcium oxalate present in secondary cortex, phloem and m edullary rays cells; a few prismatic crystals 
also present in xylem ray cells. 
Stem  - TS shows, single-layered epidermis of rectangular or isodiametri c parenchyma cells with thick tangential 
walls; 5 to 8 layered cortex of round or oval parenchyma cells contai ning a few rosette crystals and pericyclic 
fibres in sporadic patches; phloem region narrow and conspicuous; xylem com posed mainly of large, round xylem 
vessels and tracheids; medullary rays uniseriate to biseriate  in continuation with phloem and consist of small 
radially arranged rectangular cells; pith consists of large r ound parenchyma cells; the cells of cortex, pith and 
medullary rays filled with round to oval, simple starch grains measuring 5 to 10 µ in diameter. 
Leaflet  - TS of leaflet shows an isobilateral structure with a single layered upper and bilayered, cuticularized lower 
epidermis of isodiametric parenchyma cells interrupted at places  by stomata and unicellular trichomes having 
swollen bases; palisade is a single layer of columnar cells pr esent on both dorsal and ventral side of spongy 
mesophyll and upper one is continued over midrib region; spongy mesophyll consi sts of tightly packed oval 
parenchyma cells containing few large rosette crystals of ca lcium oxalate; vascular bundle in lamina and midrib 
enclosed within bundle sheath.  
Midrib  contains single meristele consisting of radially arranged xylem , phloem and patches of collenchyma cells 
on both dorsal and ventral side and 2 or 3 layers of large circular parenchyma cells insi de lower epidermis. 
Fruit  - TS of fruit shows small epidermal cells of each coccus recta ngular; unicellular trichomes abundance; 
mesocarp 6 to 10 layers of large parenchymatous cells, rosette of calcium oxalate crystals abundantly present; 
mesocarp followed by 3 to 4 compact layers of small cells containing prismatic cr ystals of calcium oxalate. 
Powder - Light green, shows fragments of leaf and stem epidermis in sur face view; sclereids of different shapes 
from fruit; simple unicellular trichomes; groups of fibres; pitte d and spiral vessels, round to oval, simple starch 
grains measuring 5 to 10 µ in diameter and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter  - Not more than     2   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2  
Total ash   - Not more than  17    per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash  - Not more than    4    per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive - Not less than      2    per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive - Not less than    12    per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7   XCVII  T.L.C. - 
T.L.C. of acetone extract (cold maceration at room temperature) of the drug on precoated silica gel ‘G’ 60 
F254  TLC plate of 0.2 mm thickness using solvent system toluene: ethyl acetate  (7.5:2.5) shows spots at R f 0.22 
(pale yellow), 0.37 (purple), 0.50 (violet), 0.55 (magenta), 0.71 (light yellow)  and 0.77 (yellowish-green), on 
spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid reagent  followed by heating at 105º for 10 minutes.  
 
CONSTITUENTS - Alkaloids: Terrestriamide, tribulusamide A, B; steroidal saponins: terre strosin C, D, E, F, G, 
H, I, J and K, terrestroneoside A and F, terreside A and B, terrestroside F; tribulosaponi n A and B, tribulosin, 
protodioscin saponin C, prototribestin, terrestrosin J, isoterrestrosin B; flavonoid gl ycosides: isorhamnetin-3-
gentiotrioside, quercetin-3-gentiobioside-7-glucoside; amide: moupinamide.  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Madhura, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Guru, Snigdha 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Madhura 
Karma 
 : Balya, B ¨¼ha ´a, D ¤pana, Kaphahara, Ke ºya,   
  M ¦trala, Pittahara,  ¹ othahara, V ¨¾ya, V ¢tahara,  
  Vedan ¢sth ¢pana  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Aguruv ¢di Taila, Cyavanapr ¢ºa Avaleha,      
                                                             Da ºam ¦la Kv ¢tha, Gok ¾ur ¢di Guggulu,                                                                             
                                                             K ¢madeva Gh ¨ta, Mah ¢r¢sn ¢di Kv¢tha,  
                                                             Pancanimba C ¦r´a, R ¢sn ¢saptaka Kv ¢tha  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - ¡mav ¢ta (Rheumatism), Amlapitta (Hyperacidity), Antrav ¨ddhi (Hernia), 
Aºmar ¤ (Calculus), Ardita (Facial palsy), Ar ºa (Piles), H ¨droga (Heart disease), Indralupta (Alopecia), 
Jvara (Fever),  K ¢sa (Cough), M ¦tr ¢gh ¢ta (Urinary obstruction), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), Pak ¾¢ gh ¢ta 
(Paralysis / Hemiplegia), Pradara (Excessive vaginal disc harge), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Raktapitta 
(Bleeding disorder), Śū la (Pain / Colic),  ¹ otha (Oedema), ¹v¢sa (Asthma), S ¦tik ¢roga (Pueroeral fever), 
S¤tapitta (Urticaria), V ¢tarakta (Gout) 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 3 to 6 g.  
             Kv ¢tha (Decoction): 50 to 100 ml. 
  XCVIII  GRANTHIM ¥¥ ¥¥LA (Rhizome) 
 
Granthim ¦la is the rhizome of the plant Alpinia calcarata  Rosc. (Fam. Zingiberaceae) which is often 
cultivated and seen as an escape in eastern and southern India. 
 
SYNONYMS-   ¹vetakula ®jana 
 
REGIONAL LANUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass.           :     Sugandhi bach 
Hin.           :     Safed Kulanjana 
Mal.          :     Chittaratha 
Ori.           :     Toroni 
Tam.         :     Nattarattai 
Tel.           :     Dumparastramu 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
 Rhizome horizontal and branched; individual pieces tortuous, size ranging from 3 to 10 cm in length and 5 
to 10 mm diameter in cross section; deep brownish orange externally, pa le buff colour internally; prominently 
marked with wavy annulation at the nodes with scaly leaf bases; internoda l length ranges from 6 to 12 mm, fracture 
is very tough, uneven and fibrous: odour, pungent; taste, spicy. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
  TS circular in outline; epidermis single layered; yellowish oi l globules present in many cells of the inner 
rows of the cortex of polygonal thin walled parenchyma of different sizes; parenchymatous cells of the inner cortex 
contain plenty of oval or circular starch grains with faint concent ric striations; vascular bundles many, scattered, 
more, grouped towards the centre; sclerenchymatous bundle sheath present. 
 
Powder- Reddish brown, microscopy shows following structures: oval to elliptic starch grains 10 to 20 µ in size; 
parenchymatous tissue fragments with polygonal and elongated cells; elongated pitted stone cells with a narrow 
lumen of 50 to 200 µ in length and a few thin walled pitted stone cells with larger lumen; reddish brown and light 
yellow resinous pieces; cells with densely compact masses of s tarch granules; annular, reticulate, scalariform and 
spiral vessels.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Foreign matter  - Not more than 2 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash    - Not more than 7 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash   - Not more than 3 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than 5   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than 6   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7  
 
  
 
 
  XCIX  T.L.C. - 
           T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate  (0.2 mm thick) using n-hexane: ethyl  
acetate  (8.6:1.4) as mobile phase,  after spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and heating at 105 o for 
5 minutes shows spots at   0.21 (pink), 0.27 (pink), 0.37 (yellow), 0.40 (light violet), 0.46 (grey), 0.53 (pink) a nd 
0.75 (grey).  
 
CONSTITUENTS-  Volatile oil rich in methyl cinnamate, cineol, camphor. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa           :  Ka °u, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a         :  Laghu, R ¦k¾a, T ¤k¾´ a 
V¤¤¤¤rya         :  U ¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka      :  Ka °u 
Karma      :  Kaphaghna, ¹varya, ¹othahara, ¹¦ laghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Used as single drug 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES -     ¡mav ¢ta (Rheumatism), Hikk ¢ (Hiccup), Kāsa (Cough), Prameha (Metabolic disorder),  
¹v¢sa (Asthma), Sandhi º¦la (Joint pain), Śū la (Pain / Colic) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 1 to 3 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CGULAD ¡¡ ¡¡UD ££££ (Leaf) 
 
            Gulad ¢ud ¤ consists of dried leaves  of Chrysanthemum indicum L. (Fam. Asteraceae), a perennial, shrubby, 
erect plant with pinnately parted leaves.  The plant is widely grown in gardens as an ornamental, and for worship in 
temple groves in the south. The various cultivated hybrids and their va rieties are not included or used as a source of 
this drug. 
 
SYNONYMS -  Chinnapatr ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
Ben.     :    Chandramukhi 
Eng.     :    Chrysanthemum 
Guj.      :    Guldaaudi 
Hin.      :    Guldaaudi 
Kan.     :    Chamanti 
Mar .    :    Shevanti 
Pun.     :    Bagaura 
Tam.    :    Chamanti 
Tel.      :    Chamanti 
Urd.    :    Gule-dawoodi  
 
DESCRIPTION – 
a)  Macroscopic: 
 Leaves usually 5 to 8 cm long, 4 to 7 cm broad, thin, dull green to light brown, crumpled, papery; lamina 
simple, pinnatifid or partite, venation reticulate, margin entire, a pex obtuse, base entire; petiole short, slightly 
winged; odour, aromatic; taste, slightly tingling. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Petiole -A transverse section of petiole reveals a roughly hemispherical  or cup shaped outline with slightly winged 
upper corners and gently concave upper margin; epidermis composed of rounded cells lined with cuticle and 
bearing scattered, multicellular trichomes with or without a 2-a rmed terminal cell; inner to epidermis are present 1 
or 2 layers of chlorenchyma followed by ground tissue composed of parenchym atous cells and containing a few, 
scattered air cavities; the central, main vascular bundle is hemispherical or rounded in shape; xylem adaxial, 
containing mostly parenchyma; phloem abaxial; each wing contains one rounde d, accessory bundle each with 
xylem facing obliquely towards inner side and phloem outside. 
 
Midrib -Midrib convex on the lower side showing a cup like protuberance, and nearly  plane on the upper with 
collenchyma patches adjacent to the epidermis on both sides; xylem v essels and parenchyma present towards the 
upper side while pholem oriented towards the lower side; vascular bundle  surrounded by parenchyma which is 
more developed towards upper and lower sides. 
 
Lamina -A transverse section through the leaf shows a dorsiventral structure; oute r epidermis made of thin walled, 
parenchymatous, rounded or squarish cells; epidermis bears uniseriate, m ulticellular trichomes eccentrically with a 
two-armed terminal cell, and also bicellular glandular hairs; a surface preparation reveals upper epidermal cells 
with straight anticlinal walls and lower epidermal cells wit h slightly sinuous anticlinal walls, surfaces also show 
eccentric cicatrices and typical bicellular glands; anomocytic  stomata present on both surfaces; stomatal index for 
upper surface 1 to 3 and that for lower surface 17 to 21; only one layer below the upper epidermis palisade like,  CI  rest of the lamina composed of almost rounded, loosely arranged cells with intercellular spaces and rich in 
chloroplasts, and occasional rudimentary vascular bundle; palisade ratio ranges fr om 3 to 5.  
 
Powder – Yellowish green, fine, odour aromatic, taste slightly tingling, under microscopy shows epidermal 
fragments with characteristic bi-armed trichomes with stalk  up to 150 µ long and arm cells up to 350 µ long, and 
bicellular glandular trichomes.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter  - Not more than   2  per cent,    Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash   - Not more than 21  per cent,    Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid- insoluble ash  - Not more than   4  per cent,    Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than   10  per cent,    Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than   22  per cent,    Appendix 2.2.7 
 
T.L.C – 
 
 T.L.C of alcoholic extract of the drug is developed on silica gel ‘G ’ 60 F 254  plate using mobile phase 
toluene: ethyl acetate: acetic acid  (5:4:1), at 366 nm shows spots at R f. 0.27 (flourescent cream), 0.40 (flourescent 
yellow) and 0.50 (light pink), 0.53 (light pink), and 0.56 (purple-pink) on spraying t he plate with Natural Products-
Polyethylene Glyco reagent. 
 
CONSTITUENTS– Sesquiterpene lactones – angeloylcumambrin B, arteglasin A and angle loylajadin. Essential 
oil from aerial parts contain di and  sesquiterpenoids α-copaene, β-elumene, β - carophyllene, β – farnesene, β – 
humulene, germacrene-D.  α-silenene, curcumene, calamenene,  γ-cadinene and T-murolol, and monoterpenoids 
myrcene, 1,8-cineol and bornyl acetate. Chrysanthenone and chrysanthenine gluc oside. Aerial parts also contain 
lignans sesamin and fargesin, and flavonoid penduletin. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
Rasa    : Tikta, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a   :  Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya   :  ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka              :  Ka °u 
Karma      :  Pittahara, Ropa ´a, ¹¦ lapra ºamana, H ¨dya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATION – Satapatri Guna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES -  Ardhavabhedaka (Hemicrania / Migraine), Mukhasphota (Ulcer in the mouth), 
¹irah º¦ la (Head ache), Tvakroga (Skin diseases), Vra ´a (Ulcer), Yavanpidika (Pimples / Acne vulgaris) 
 
DOSE – C¦r´a (Powder) :  3 to 6 g daily.   CII  HARITAMA ¿¿ ¿¿JAR ££££ (Whole Plant) 
 
 Haritama ®jar ¤ consists of the dried whole plant of Acalypha indica  L. (Fam. Euphorbiaceae), an annual 
herb up to 120 cm, occurring throughout the plains and hotter parts of India, as a weed. 
 
SYNONYMS – Muktavarc ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES-  
 
Ass.       :     Patrasaki, Mukuta manjari 
Ben.           :    Muktajhuri 
Eng.           :    Indian Acalypha 
Guj.           :    Vanchi Kanto 
Hin.           :    Kuppi, Aamaabhaaji  
Kan.          :    Kuppigida 
Mal.           :    Kuppameni 
Mar.          :    Khokli, Khajoti 
Ori.           :    Indramaris, Nakachana 
Pun.          :    Kuppi 
Tam.          :    Kupaaimeni  
Tel.           :    Kuppichettu, Kuppinta, Muripindi 
 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a)  Macroscopic: 
 
Root -  Vertical and branched; 2 to 8 mm in thickness, tortuous, rough; colour var ies from grey to brown when dry, 
broken surface creamy yellow; fracture giving rise to a cloud of dusty particl es; no characteristic smell; bitter. 
 
Stem -  Mature stem brownish and younger parts green, sparsely hairy, terete, 2 to10 mm in thick ness. 
 
Leaf -  Simple and alternate, dull to dark green to brownish; brittle when dr y; petiole 1 to 7 cm, lower leaves with 
longer petiole, pubescent; lamina 2 to 5 cm long and 1 to 4 cm broad, ovate to rhombic ovate, tip acute, base 
cuneate, pale green below and dark green above, margin serrate and ha iry; veins 5 to 7 pairs, generally alternate, 
usually 3 veins arising from the base, prominent and hairy below; midr ib slightly raised on the upper surface, and 
prominent on the lower surface.   
 
Inflorescence -  Axillary, stalked, spike, 1 to 7 cm long; flowers unisexual, green, s ubsessile and encircled by a 
leafy, orbicular serrate bract of about 4 mm long and 5 to 8 mm broad; female flowers 5 to 15, basal, 2 mm across; 
male flowers numerous, minute; spike usually terminating in an all omorphic flower; fruits capsules, small and 
green; seeds minute, ovoid and pale brown. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Root -  TS of the root  circular in outline; cork consists of 8 to 10 rows of  rectangular to tangentially elongated 
cells; secondary cortex consists of a few layers of slightly elongated, polygonal cells, followed by a broken ring of 
pericycle with sporadic sclerenchymatous patches, followed by small patches of  phloem; xylem consists of vessels, 
tracheids and xylem parenchyma, all thick walled and lignified; me dullary rays prominent, mostly uni or biseriate,  CIII  rarely multiseriate; calcium oxalate crystals and laticif erous ducts absent, distinction from A. fruticosa , where both 
are present. 
 
Stem -  TS cylindrical in outline; uniseriate, multicellular trichomes with elongated cells and a tapering terminal 
cell and uni cellular trichomes present; below the epidermis 3 or 4 layers of  c ollenchyma followed by 4 to 7 layers 
of cortical parenchyma present; pericycle of discontinued patches of sclerenchyma with 3 or 4 layers, capping the 
phloem; xylem continuous as a ring and consists of vessels, tracheids and parenchyma, thick walled and lignified; 
pith consists of polygonal parenchymatous cells; abundant rosettes of ca lcium oxalate present throughout cortex 
and pith, ranging from10 to 20 µm in diameter. 
 
Leaf - 
 
Petiole -   TS of the petiole circular in outline; epidermal hairs are multi cellular and uniseriate; epidermis followed 
by 6 to 7 layers of small angular parenchyma; 5 or 6 vascular bundles  in variable sizes present as a broken ring; 
phloem a small patch over the xylem; pith consists of large parenc hyma cells, some containing cluster crystals of 
calcium oxalate. 
 
 Midrib  - TS of midrib shows a ridge on the adaxial side with a cap of three  layered collenchyma cells just below 
the upper epidermis and a similar band of collenchyma on the abaxial si de above the lower epidermis; below the 
collenchymatous patch is a single row of palisade tissue, which cont inues in the lamina; cortex consists of circular 
to polygonal parenchyma; vascular system consists of about 8 groups of bundle s, consisting of xylem vessels above 
phloem elements.  
 
Lamina -  Dorsiventral, cuticle present, upper epidermis followed by a single  layer of palisade tissue; mesophyll 
shows a series of clusters of calcium oxalate crystals; spongy  mesophyll contains irregular polygonal cells; lower 
epidermal cells are similar to the upper epidermis; epidermal cells with slightly wavy walls in surface view; 
paracytic stomata on lower surface; stomatal index 2; palisade r atio 5 or 6; unicellular multiseriate trichomes are 
sparingly seen. 
 
Powder - Powder light brown and slightly bitter, no odour; microscopic study shows r osettes and clusters of 
calcium oxalate crystals 10 to 20 µ diameter; multicellular uniseriate trichomes of 150 to 200 µ length and 
unicellular trichomes of about 120 to 160 µ length; orange brown resinous pieces; irregular granular masses;  patch 
of epidermal parenchyma with paracytic stomata; fragments of pi tted, scalariform, annular, and   spiral vessels and 
wood parenchyma. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
 
Foreign matter  -     Not more than 2   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash   -     Not more than 14 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash   -     Not more than 1   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  -     Not less than 3     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  -     Not less than 10   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7 
 T.L.C.- 
 
 T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plat e (0.2 mm thick) using n-hexane: 
chloroform: methanol  (1.5:7.5:1) as mobile phase, after spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid  reagent  and 
heating at 105 o for 5 minutes shows spots at R f 0.32 (light violet), 0.38 (pink), 0.43 (pink), 0.48 (light pink), 0.66 
(light pink), 0.73 (light violet), 0.81 (pink) and 0.88 (pink). 
  CIV  CONSTITUENTS – Alkaloids: acalyphine, quinine, amides such as acalyphamide, sterols, k aempferol and 
cyanogenic glycoside.    
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION –  
Rasa        :  Tikta, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a       :  Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya                   :  U ¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka                :  Ka °u 
Karma                :  Kaphaghna, V ¢maka, ¹ransana, K ¨mighna, M ¦trala, Tvakdo ¾ahara,    
                               Amado ¾ahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Punarnav ¢di C ¦r´a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Agnim āndya (Digestive impairment), Danta º¦la (Tooth ache), Kar ´aº¦la (Otalgia), K āsa 
(Cough), Sandhi ºotha (Arthritis), Śvāsa (Asthma), Vibandha (Constipation) 
 
DOSE- C¦r´a (Powder): 3 to 5 g. 
             Svarasa (Juice):  5 to 10 ml, 1 to 3 in Kar ´aº¦ la. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CV HASTI ¹¹ ¹¹U³±£³±£³±£³±£ (Aerial Part) 
Hasti ºu´²¤ consists of dried aerial parts of Heliotropium indicum  L. (Fam. Boraginaceae), an annual herb, 
15 to 60 cm in height with densely hirsute ascending branches, found throughout t he hotter parts of India along 
roadside and on waste lands. 
SYNONYMS - Bh ¦ra ´²¤, ¹rihastini, A ºmariripu, Mah ¢º u´² ¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
a) Macroscopic: 
Stem - Cut pieces 7 to 13 cm long and 0.3 to 1.1 cm in thickness, stout, hollow, pubescent  with white stiff 
spreading hairs and longitudinal ridges; colour, brown; fracture, short; no odour; taste, bitt er and astringent.  
Leaf - Cordate, obtuse with sub-serrate margins; 2.5 to 10 cm long and 2.5 to 5 cm broad; rough, sparsely hairy; 
brownish, surface wrinkled, veins, prominent on lower surface; no odour; taste, bitter 
b) Microscopic:  
Stem - TS shows, single-layered epidermis covered with thick cuticle w ith a few cells modified into unicellular 
trichomes; collenchymatous hypodermis; thick-walled parenchymatous cor tex; a narrow zone of phloem containing 
patches of non-lignified phloem fibres; a comparatively larger zone  of xylem composed mainly of tracheids and a 
few vessels, solitary or in groups of 2 or 3; rays uniseriate of  radially elongated pitted parenchymatous cells; 
collapsed pith with a few remnants of parenchymatous cells attached to the xylem. 
Leaf -  
Petiole -TS of petiole shows an epidermis consisting of thick-walled recta ngular cells interrupted at places by 
unicellular warty trichomes and glandular trichomes with unicellula r head and 1 to 3 celled stalk; ground tissue 
composed of outer 8  to 10 layers of small, thick-walled oval parenchyma filled with br ownish contents and inner 5 
to 8 layers of large oval parenchyma cells; vascular bundles present i n ground tissue unequal in size, collateral with 
abaxial phloem; central vascular bundle being large, with arc-shaped xylem and facing the concave side of the 
petiole while two small vascular bundles present in the wings. 
 Ben. :   Haathishundaa 
Eng. :   Indian Turnsole 
Guj. :   Haathisudhaan 
Hin. :   Haathisuondha, Haathisundha 
Kan. :   Chelubaaladgidh 
Mal. :   Telkkat, Terkkat, Tekkit 
Mar. :   Bhurundi 
Tam. :   Telkodukkai 
Tel. :   Kodikki, Naagdanti  CVI  Midrib -TS through midrib region shows a single layered upper and lower epidermis cove red with thick cuticle and 
possessing a few long, tubercled unicellular trichomes with bulbous base ; central zone of vascular bundles 
containing arc shaped xylem and covered by collenchymatous layer on upper and lower side. 
 
Lamina - Dorsiventral; mesophyll composed of single layered palisade and 6 to 8 layers of spongy parenchyma; 
tanniniferous sacs in the mesophyll and around the vascular bundles; stomata anomocytic;  stomatal index 17 to 20.  
 
Powder - Greenish-brown, shows vessels with spiral thickenings; numerous trac heids, entire or in pieces; pitted 
parenchymatous cells from medullary rays; long, unicellular trichom es; leaf epidermis in surface view with 
anomocytic stomata and unicellular trichomes. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter  - Not more than 2   per cent,    Appendix 2.2.2  
Total ash   - Not more than 12 per cent,    Appendix 2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash  - Not more than 2   per cent,    Appendix 2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive - Not less than 4     per cent,    Appendix 2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive - Not less than 12   per cent,    Appendix 2.2.7  
T.L.C. - 
 T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on precoated silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  TLC plate (E. Merck) of 0.2 mm 
thickness using chloroform : methanol : ammonia   (80:13:2) shows spots at R f. 0.12 (violet), 0.27 (grey), 0.37 
(grey), 0.51 (violet), 0.76 (violet), 0.86 (maroon), 0.90 (green) and 0.94 (red) on spr aying with anisaldehyde-
sulphuric acid reagent  followed by heating at 105º for 10 minutes.  
CONSTITUENTS -   Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (heliotrine, indicine N-oxide), tannins. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION -   
Rasa   :   Ka °u, Tikta   
Gu ´´ ´´a  :   T¤k¾´ a, Laghu   
V¤¤¤¤rya   :  U¾´ a  
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka :  Ka °u  
Karma  : Jvaraghna, Vedanahara 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Hastisundi,  Hastisundi Guna 
THERAPEUTIC USES -  Sannipatajivara (High fever due to vitiation of all dosas), Śū la (Pain 
/ Colic) 
DOSE –    C¦r´a (Powder):   3 to 6 g.  CVII  IND ££££VARA (Rhizome)  
 
 Ind ¤vara  consists of the rhizomes of Monochoria vaginalis  Presl.  Syn. Pontederia vaginalis  Burm.f  (Fam. 
Pontederiaceae), an aquatic herb with short, sub erect spongy root stock found in rice fiel ds, ditches, margins of 
tanks and pools, swamps and marshes almost throughout India, ascending upto 1,500 m in the hills.  
 
SYNONYMS - Bhagapatr ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Mal. :  Karinkuvvalam 
Tam. :  Karunkuvalam,  Cenkalunir kilanku 
Tel.  :  Nirkanca 
 
DESCRIPTION-  
 
a) Macroscopic : 
 
Rhizome-clothed with leaf sheath, spongy roots, light in weight, size v ariable, dark greenish pink in colour; 
no odour; taste, salty.  
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Rhizome – Epidermis single layered; a cortical region distinct from the  stelar region present; cortical region 
prominently aerenchymatous with large air chambers due to parenchyma tous trabeculae; several small patches of 
tissues present among the trabeculae, some of which are of undiffere ntiated parenchyma while some show a strand 
or two of xylem and phloem; several of the air chambers show partition by a thi n diaphragm of one or two layers of 
thin walled cells with minute intercellular spaces and cross- w all perforations; occasionally, a cortical bundle with 
well developed vascular tissues within a distinct endodermis and ai r chambers seen, beneath which a thick walled 
parenchymatous sheath of 6 or 7 layers of cells enclosing the xylem, phloem and parenchyma is present; cortical 
region also shows raphides, starch grains and amber coloured amorphous bodies  staining bright red with Sudan III 
in fair amounts, most of them displaced from their original positions;  stelar region surrounded by endodermis, 
within which numerous patches of reduced vascular bundles containing a few  xylem and phloem strands are seen; 
air spaces also sporadically present; starch grains similar to cortex pres ent. 
 
Powder – Blackish pink, shows raphides, starch grains, parenchyma, vessel ele ments scalariform or pitted; non 
septate fibres 500 to 1000 µ; circular starch grains 8 to 12 µ in diameter.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH –  
 
Foreign matter   -   Not more than    1      per cent,  Appendix  2.2.2 
Total ash      -  Not more than  15      per cent,  Appendix  2.2.3 
Acid - insoluble ash    -  Not more than    5      per cent,  Appendix  2.2.4 
Alcohol - soluble extractive   -   Not  less than     7      per cent,  Appendix  2.2.6 
Water - soluble extractive   -   Not  less than   10      per cent,  Appendix  2.2.7 
Fixed oil                                              -   Not less than      1      per cent,  Appendix  2.2.8 
 
 
 
  CVIII  T.L.C. – 
 
 T.L.C. of chloroform extract on aluminium plate precoated with silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  of 0.2 mm thickness 
using toluene : ethyl acetate  (6:1) and 6 drops of formic acid  viewed under UV 254 nm  spots appear at R f. 0.21, 
0.26, 0.32, 0.42, 0.60 and 0.72 (both green).  Under UV 366 nm  fluorescent zones appear at R f. 0.11, 0.21 (all 
white ), 0.29 and 0.70 ( navy blue), 0.34, 0.42, 0.60, 0.63  (all red orange), 0.47 (violet) and 0.55 (pale blue). On 
exposure to iodine vapour  spots appear at R f. 0.21, 0.29 (both yellowish brown), 0.37 (brown), 0.52, 0.69, 0.74 and 
0.86 (all yellowish brown).  When the plate is dipped in vanillin-sulphuric acid reagent  and heated at 105° for 5 
minutes,  spots appear at R f 0.21 (pale pink), 0.26 (red orange), 0.34(grey), 0.37 (pink), 0.47 (violet), 0.55 (pale 
violet), 0.63 (reddish brown), 0.72 (pale violet), 0.78, 0.86 (both grey) and 0.95 (violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS- Stigmasterol 3-O-beta-D-glucopyranoside. 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Guru, Snigdha 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Madhura 
Karma : B ¨¼ ha ´a, Balya, D ¢hapra ºamana, Pitta º¢maka, V ¨¾ya, V ¢ta- 
  Kaphavardhaka 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATION – Indivara Guna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- D¢ha (Burning sensation), Daurbalya (Weakness), Dh ¢tuk ¾ya 
(Tissue wasting), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), Yak ¨tvik ¢ra (Disorder of liver)  
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder) : 3 to 6 g.  CIX  JALAKUMBH ££££ (Whole Plant) 
 
 Jalakumbh ¤ consists of dried whole plant of Pistia stratiotes L. (Fam. Araceae), an aquatic monoecious 
stemless plant, rarely anchored by roots, and spreading with the heip of  stolons; found in water bodies in tropical 
and sub-tropical regions of India. 
 
SYNONYMS –  Kumbhik ¢, V ¢ripar ´¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic:  
  
 Drug consists of  rosette leaves arising on a condensed stem conne cted through short, soft, whitish, 
horizontal stolons and having long thin, wiry, fibrous branched roots arising in tuft from the lower portion of 
condensed stem opposite the leaves; roots dark brown or blackish in colour  with dense, fine, filiform branches 
arising all along their length; length 5 to 10 cm, apical region cov ered over by root pockets, root hair poorly 
developed; aerial parts pale green to yellowish brown; rosette cons isting of 5 leaves on a condensed axis; 
apetiolate, exstipulate, cauline, hairy, soft, shiny; margin smooth; roug hly spathulate, apical portion expanded; 
proximal part strap shaped; veins parallel divergent, 3 to 6, usually 1 or 2, bifurcating towards the top portion; no 
fruits or flowers present.  
 
b) Microscopic:  
 
Leaf  –TS passing through the proximal part of leaf shows it to be isobilateral and flattened;  ventral surface slightly 
ridged, while the dorsal side is fully convex; epidermal cells thi n walled squarish or polygonal; cuticle absent: 
epidermis bearing abundant multicellular hair varying widely in le ngth from proximal to distal end of leaf but 
generally about 200 to 400 µ long and 29 to 36 µ wide, uniseriate with a char acteristic bulbous base, which 
assumes a saucer like form in dried samples; terminal cell of hair when present drawn out or conical but more often 
incomplete and broken off; hair more abundant on the ventral side; stomat a absent, mesophyll lacunate with some 
cells having spindle shaped raphides and star like druses of calcium  oxalate crystals; occasionally some sub 
epidermal cells have brown pigments in them; circular groups of undif ferentiated vascular tracts and mechanical 
tissues generally present in vertical rows of three; xylem a nd phloem cells poorly developed; leaf thinner towards 
the distal end; transection of the distal end shows ridges at regular interva ls corresponding with main veins on both 
the surfaces; those on the lower surface more prominent; strands of mechanical tissue associated with the ridges, Ben. :  Tokaapaanaa 
Eng. :  Water lettuce 
Guj. :  Jalakumbhi, Jalashamkhala 
Hin. :  Choti Jala-kumbhi, Jalakumbhi  
Kan. :  Antara gange 
Mal. :  Akasa thamara, Kudapayal, Muttapayal 
Mar. :  Prasni, Gondali  
Ori. :  Borajhanji 
Tam. :  Akasa tamarai, Koditamarai 
Tel. :  Antara-Tamara, Nirubuduki 
Urd. :  Jalakumbhi 
  CX one occupying the centre of the upper ridge while another in the lower r idge; upper ridge become inconspicuous 
towards the distal tip of the leaf; in the lamina portion, 3 to 4 lay ers of subepidermal, thin walled cells are 
compactly arranged below the upper epidermis and have abundant and prominent chloroplasts; parenchymatous 
ground tissue towards the lower epidermis lacunate; druses and spindle shaped groups of raphides present in this 
region also.  
 
Stolon  – The stolon is characterized by a ground tissue supporting longitudinal st rands of undifferentiated 
mechanical elements and lacunae centrally; the outer 4 or 5 layers below the epider mis are without lacunae. 
 
Powder – The powder reveals multicellular trichomes with characteristi cs bulbous basal cells and fragments of 
parenchyma cells; raphides upto 170 µ long and druses upto 40 µ in diameter are abundant.   
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTN – 
 
Foreign matter   -  Not more than     6      per cent,    Appendix  2.2.2  
Total ash    -  Not more than   52      per cent,    Appendix  2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash   -  Not more than   35      per cent,    Appendix  2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive -  Not less than       5      per cent,    Appendix  2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive -  Not less than       2      per cent,    Appendix  2.2.7  
n -Hexane -soluble  -  Not less than       1      per cent,    Appendix  2.2.8 
extractive 
 
T.L.C.- 
 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on pre-coated silica gel ‘G’ plate  (0.2 mm thickness) using toluene: ethyl 
formate: formic acid (5:4:1), under UV 366 nm shows spots at R f. 0.36 (pink), 0.40 (pink). Spraying the plate with 
anisaldehyde: sulphuric acid reagent  and on heating for ten minutes at 105 o under UV 366 nm shows spots at R f. 
0.34 (cream) 0.38 (orange brown), 0.59 (green), 0.88 (green). 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Vicenin, lucenin, cyanidine-3-glucoside. 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION- 
 
Rasa                                :  Madhura, Tikta, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a                               :  Laghu, R ¦k¾a, Sara 
V¤¤¤¤rya                                : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka                             :  Madhura 
Karma                             : Balya, M ¦trajanana,  ¹ othahara, Trido ¾ahara 
 
IMPORTANT   FORMULATIONS- Bal ¢º vagandh ¢l¢k¾¢ di Taila, Jalakumbh ¤bhasmaprayoga ª, V ¢ripar ´¤ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES-  Ar ºa (Piles), D ¢ha (Burning sensation), Galaga ´² a (Goitre), Jvara (Fever), Ku ¾°ha 
(Leprosy / diseases of skin), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria),  ¹ o¾a (Emaciation), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder) 
 
DOSE- C ¦r´a (Powder): 3 to 5 g. 
             Svarasa (Juice): 10 to 20 ml.  CXI  J££££VANT ££££ ( Root) 
 
 J¤vant ¤ consists of dried roots of Leptadenia reticulata W. & A. (Fam. Asclepiadaceae), a much branched 
twining shrub, distributed throughout the plains of India, along hedges. 
 
SYNONYMS –  J¤vant ¤, ¹¢ka ºre ¾tªa, J ¤van ¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
      Roots cylindrical, 5 to 7 cm in length and 1 to 3 cm in thickness, surfa ce light brown to greyish brown 
with longitudinal wrinkles; fracture, tough; fractured surface creamish and horny ; odour and taste indistinct. 
  
b) Microscopic: 
  Root shows cork consisting of rectangular and tangentially elongat ed cells, phellogen 1 to 2 layered; 
phelloderm consists of thin walled parenchyma cells with groups of st one cells and fibres scattered in the central 
and lower regions; phloem made up of sieve tubes, companion cells, parenchy ma, fibres and stone cells being 
transversed by uni to multiseriate medullary rays, groups of fibre s and stone cells present in outer phloem region, 
stone cells are about 60 µ in length and 20 µ in width, fibres are upto 1300 µ in length; xylem represented by 
vessels, tracheids, fibres, parenchyma, interxylary phloem and uni to m ulti seriate medullary rays, all xylem 
elements except interxylary phloem thick walled and lignified; ve ssels drum shaped or elongated with bordered pits 
or scalariform thickenings, bordered pitted tracheids, fibres elongat ed with tapering or bifurcated ends present; 
xylem parenchyma simple pitted; rosettes of calcium oxalate cry stals present in some of the parenchyma cells of 
phloem and phelloderm.  
 
Powder - Powder shows rectangular to polygonal stone cells, vessels with borde red pits or scalariform thickenings, 
border pitted tracheids, fibres with tapering or bifurcated ends, thick  walled parenchyma cells with simple pits and 
thin walled parenchyma cells with rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
Foreign matter     -  Not more than   2   per cent,     Apprndix 2.2.2 
Total ash      -  Not more than 14   per cent,     Apprndix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash     -  Not more than 1.5  per cent,     Apprndix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive    -  Not less than      5  per cent,     Apprndix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive    - Not less than      3  per cent,     Apprndix 2.2.7 Ben. 
ng. :   Jiwanti 
:   Cork Swallow-wort 
Guj. :   Dodee 
Hin. :   Dodi Shak, Jivanti 
Mal. :   Atapatiyan 
Mar. :   Kheerakhodee 
Tam. :   Palalkkodi 
Tel. :   Palatige, Mukkutummudu  CXII  T.L.C.- 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plates usi ng chloroform: methanol:water  (4:3:1) as 
mobile phase  under UV 254 nm shows spots at R f. 0.01, 0.21, 0.26 (all blue), 0.54, and 0.75 (both white). 
 
CONSTITUENTS -  Hentriacontanol, α- and β-amyrin, stigmasterol, β-sitosterol and flavonoids-diosmetin and 
luteolin. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
Rasa     :  Madhura, Ka ¾¢ ya  
Gu ´´ ´´a     :  Laghu, Snigdha  
V¤¤¤¤rya     :  ¹¤ta  
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka    : Madhura  
Karma     : Ras ¢yana, Balya, Cak ¾usya, Grahi, Vrsya, B ¨¼ ha ´a,   
                  Stanyajanana, Visaghna, Tridosahara  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Cyavanapr ¢º a, Br ¢hmaras ¢yana, Amrtapr ¢º agh ¨ta,             
Aºokagh ¨ta, B ¨hatm ¢¾ ataila, Marmagu °ik ¢, M ¢nasamitrava °aka, ¹vsahara ka ¾¢ yac ¦r´a,  
Gu ²¦ cy ¢ditaila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Atis¢ra (Diarrhoea), D ¢ha (Burning sensation), Jvara (Fever), K ¾aya (Pthisis), K āsa 
(Cough), ¹o¾a (Cachexia), Mukharoga (Disease of mouth), Nakt ¢ndhya (Night blindness), Netraroga (Diseases of 
the eye), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), T ¨¾´ ā (Thirst), Urhksata (Pulmonary cavitation), Vra ´a (Ulcer) 
 
DOSE-    C¦r´a (Powder): 3 to 6 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CXIII  KA ³¯ ³¯ ³¯ ³¯ AK ££££GULMA (Aerial Part) 
 
Ka ´°ak ¤gulma consists of aerial parts of Lycium barbarum  L. Syn. L. europeaum (Fam. Solanaceae), a 
spinous shrub growing upto one metre or above, with small leaves and flowers, and occurs in the dr ier plains of 
central and southern peninsula.   
 
SYNONYMS - Sitak ¢´da, Chatrake ºara 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
a) Macroscopic:  
Bulk drug consists of broken leaves, pieces of thorny twigs and pieces of stem 2 to 4 inc hes long and 0.3 to 
0.6 cm thick; flowers and fruits may be present. 
Stem  -White or grey, angular to almost squarish in shape, with four prominent ridges, armed with sharp conical, 
short thorns, and occasional long ones which may bear leaves. 
Leaf  -Solitary or more commonly in fascicles, variously shaped as oblong-s pathulate to linear-lanceolate 
measuring 4.5 to 6 cm long and 0.6 to 1.5 cm wide; attenuated into a short pet iole which is continuous as the 
midrib in the leaf; obtuse tip; glaborous. 
Flower - Flowers are solitary or in fascicles, regular, bisexual on a sm all pedicel about 1 or 2 cm long; calyx – 
sepals 5, united to form a bell shaped or tubular calyx, 0.4 to 0.6 cm; coroll a – petals 5, lavender to purplish, light 
purple to white in colour, united to more than half of the length towards t he base to form a funnel shaped corolla 
tube, the rest of the portion spreading as free lobes, about 0.7 to 1.5 cm long ; androecium – stamens 5, free, adnate 
to the corolla tube, anther lobes united, filaments long; gynoecium – car ples 2, united, ovary superior, two celled, 
ovules numerous in each locule. 
Fruit –A berry with persistent calyx; ovoid to oblong; bright red, dark red, or orangeish yel low in colour; about 0.8 
to 2 cm long and 0.6 to 0.8 cm in diameter; seeds somewhat flat or disc oid in shape, about 2 mm in diameter, 
embedded in the fleshy pulp of the fruit. 
b) Microscopic:  
Stem  -Transversely cut section almost squarish in outline with four promine nt ridges at the corners and four minor 
ridges at the centre of each side; epidermis made up of single layer of barrel s haped cells covered by cuticle; cortex 
composed of 4 or 5 layers of collenchyma and 3 to 4 layers of parenchyma ; idioblasts present, several filled with 
large rosettes of calcium oxalate  and a few packed with micr osphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate; patches of 
pericyclic fibres present; vascular bundles present below the ridg es, consists of an outer ring of 5 or 6 rows of 
phloem, 2 or 3 layered cambium, a xylem with large groups of xylem vessels, xylem f ibres, xylem parenchyma and 
interxylary phloem, alternating with smaller bundles with xylem vessels, xy lem fibres, and xylem parenchyma; two 
vascular bundles opposite to each other present in the parenchymatous pith which also shows idioblasts filled with 
microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate. Guj. Gangro 
Hin. Chiritta 
Mar. Gangro 
Pun. Ganger, Chirchitta 
Urd. Chirchitta  CXIV  Leaf -  
Midrib  – TS  shows four vascular bundles; cortex made up of collenchyma and parenchyma; a few cells of idioblast 
in the ground tissue are filled with large rosettes of calcium oxalate; epidermis made up of barrel shaped cells 
covered by a cuticle and long warty trichomes 
Lamina  -Dorsiventral; upper epidermis followed by 2 or 3 layers of palisade tissue; a few idioblast present in 
palisade containing large rosettes of calcium oxalate, followed by 2 or 3 layers of s pongy tissue.  
Powder - Light green, taste slightly astringent; odour characteristic; shows fr agments of lamina, rosettes of calcium 
oxalate crystals, long trichomes ranging from 48 to 105 mm in length, m ade up of two to three cells out of which 
the apical one is long, warty and caducous whereas the lower ones are  small with smooth walls; xylem vessels, 
upper and lower epidermis made up of slightly way walls covered by paracytic stomata and trichomes or base of 
trichomes; epidermis of the stem in sectional view, radially c ut medullary rays, fibres with thick walls and narrow 
lumen, non-septate, lignified, ranging from 35 to 70 mm in length.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -  
Foreign matter  -  Not more than     2        per cent,   Appendix    2.2.2 
Total ash   - Not more than   15        per cent,   Appendix    2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -  Not more than     2        per cent,   Appendix    2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive -   Not less than     4.5       per cent,   Appendix    2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than     20        per cent,   Appendix    2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
Take 2 g of the powdered drug and extract with methanol (2 x 25 ml), by r efluxing on a water bath. Filter 
and concentrate the pooled extract. Adjust the volume to 10 ml with ethanol  and apply about 20 µl on precoated 
silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  plate (thickness 0.2 mm). 
Developed T.L.C. plate using chloroform: methanol  (9:1) as mobile phase, spray with anisaldehyde 
sulphuric acid reagent  followed by heating at 105º for 5 min, shows  bands at R f. 0.13 (blue), 0.26 (light purple), 
0.30 (light purple), 0.39 (light purple), 0.52 (light purple), 0.60 (light purple), 0.78 (l ight pink), 0.87 (pink) and 
0.96 (pink). 
 
CONSTITUENTS –  Atropine, diosgenin,  quercetin, rutin. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Cak ¾u¾ya, D ¤pan ¤ya, M ¦trala 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS –  Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES -  Agnim āndya (Digestive impairment), Danta º¦ la (Tooth ache), 
Jalodara (Ascites), Ka ´² u (Itching), Rakt ¢rºa (Bleeding piles) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder) : 2 to 5 g.  CXV KARAPHS ¡¡ ¡¡ (Root) 
 
 Karaphs ¢ consists of dried roots of Apium graveolens L. (Fam. Apiaceae), an erect herb with 
conspicuously jointed stems grown in Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh.  
 
SYNONYMS -  D ¤pyaka 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION –  
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
Root-  Numerous, upto 15 cm long and 1.5 cm thick, filiform, tapering, rougn, wrinkled, having root hairs; 
externally dirty white, internally pale in colour; fracture smooth; odour none; taste  none.  
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
            TS root shows outer layer of periderm composed of cork cells, phelloge n and phelloderm; followed by 
loosely arranged, thin walled parenchymatous cortex; secondary phloem re gion consists of sieve elements, phloem 
rays and phloem parenchyma, cells thin walled and hexagonal; cambium com posed of a few layers which separate 
secondary phloem from secondary xylem; secondary xylem consists of tr acheids, vessels, xylem region traversed 
by uniseriate and beseriate medullary rays. 
 
Powder – Shows under microscope, vessels, some tailed, elongated walls with pi ts arranged in a scalariform 
manner; simple perforation; tracheid walls bear elongated pits; f ibres elongated, pointed at both the ends, length 
ranging from 140 to 550 µ and breadth between 12 to 22 µ. 
  
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
Foreign matter               -  Not more than     5       per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash    -   Not more than   10       per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -   Not more than     2       per cent,   Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  -   Not less than       9       per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  -   Not less than     10       per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7  
Volatile oil     -   Not less than    0.05     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.10 Ass. : Bonjamani, Bonajain, Yamani, Ajowan 
Ben. : Randhuni, Banyamani 
Guj. : Bodi Ajamo, Ajamo 
Hin. : Ajmuda, Ajmod 
Kan. : Oma, Ajavana, Omakki 
Mal. : Ayamodakum, Oman 
Mar. : Ajmoda Oova 
Ori. : Banajuani 
Pun. : Valjawain, Ajmod 
Tel. : Nuranji vamu 
Urd. : Karafs  CXVI  T.L.C.- 
 
T.L.C. of essential oil and methanolic extract on silica gel ‘G’ precoated plate, using ethyl acetate: hexane 
shows spots at R f. 0.81 (pink to purple fouorescence), on spray with 2% vanillin-sulfuric acid   and at R f. 0.20 on 
spraying with Dragendroff’s reagent – 50% sulfuric acid, with  2:4 dinitrophenylthydrazine and UV light (365 nm). 
    
CONSTITUENTS – α-Pinene, β-pinene, limonene, pentylbenzene, β-selinen, 3- n-butyl phthalide. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Ka °u, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : D ¤pana, Kaphahara, M ¦trala, Svedajanana, V ¢tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES -  A ºmar ¤ (Calculus), Bastiroga (Diseases of urinary system), 
G¨dhras ¤ (Sciatica), Hikk ¢ (Hiccup), Jalodara (Ascites), Kaphaja ¹iroroga (Catarrhal Siro-roga 
/ Sinusitis), Kaphajvara (Fever due to Kapha dosa), M ¦tr ¢gh ¢ta (Urinary obstruction / 
Retention of urine), Masti ¾kadaurbalya (Neurosthenia), P ¨¾°ha º¦la (Lumbago), P ¢rºva º¦la 
(Intercostal neuralgia and pleurodynia), Sarv ¢¬ga ºopha (Anasarca), ¹¦la (Pain), Udara º¦ la 
(Pain in the abdomen), Udararoga (Diseases of abdomen), V ¢tarakta (Gout), Yak ¨tpl ¤h¢ Vik ¢ra 
(Diseases of liver and spleen)   
 
DOSE – C¦r´a (Powder) : 5 to 7 g.  CXVII  KA ¯¯ ¯¯UGULMA (Whole Plant) 
 
 Ka °ugulma  is the whole plant of Toddalia asiatica (L.) Lam. Syn. Toddalia aculeata  Pers. (Fam. 
Rutaceae), a scandent, prickly large shrub found in almost all parts of peninsular India . 
 
SYNONYMS –  Hemam ¦l¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. : Kada-todali 
Eng. : Wild orange tree, Lopez tree, Forest pepper 
Hin. : Jangli-kalimirch, Dahan, Kanja 
Kan. : Kaadumenagu, Mullumastige 
Mal. : Kaka toddali 
Mar. : Limri, Manger 
Ori. : Tundpora 
Tam. : Milagaranai, Kattumilagu, Milagu, Charanai 
Tel. : Mirapagandra 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
Root -Branched and woody; 8 to 20 mm in thickness; yellowish brown externally a nd cream coloured on cut 
surface; inner side of the root bark brown in colour; fracture hard and splintery; bitter  and slightly aromatic. 
 
Stem  -Cylindrical, prickly, green, puberulant and more prickly when young, dar k brown when mature; prickles 
greyish brown, stiff, recurved, 1 to 3 mm long; young prickles with re ddish brown tip; young stem olive green 
when dry; mature stem brownish with lenticels, 4 to 10 mm in thickness; internodes 2.5 to 4 cm l ong. 
 
Leaf  -Palmately compound, alternate, with three leaflets, gland dotted; st raw yellow to olive green; leathery; 
petiole 1 to 4 cm long and have 1 to 4 prickles at the base; lamina 4 to 9 cm long and 1 to 4 cm broad, glabrous; 
margin entire to crenate, base cuneate and sometimes slightly obl ique, tip acute and notched; veins 15 to 26 pairs, 
midrib prominent and with a few prickles abaxially; highly aromatic. 
 
Inflorescence  -Axillary racemes or panicles of 6 cm length; peduncles armed, s olitary or paired; flowers creamy 
yellow, 4 mm across; fruit a pea sized berry, globose, orange-red when ripe, seeds 1 to 3, har d and shiny. 
 
 b) Microscopic:  
Root –TS shows cork consisting of 10 to 20 layers of elongated, lignified ce lls; cortex made of irregular or 
polyhedral parenchymatous cells; phloem not prominent; xylem thick wall ed, with pitted vessels, tracheids and 
xylem parenchyma; some cortical cells and xylem parenchyma contai n resin; medullary rays usually bi or 
uniseriate and occasionally multiseriate, having starch grains. 
 
Stem  -TS of the stem is circular in outline; epidermis with small rectangular c ells and a thick cuticle; followed by a 
cortex of 4 to 6 polygonal cells, some of which are yellowish brown havi ng oil globules; some cortex cells also 
contain many small starch grains; cortex followed by a discontinuous ring of scle renchyma of 3 or 4 layers forming 
pericycle; phloem consists of phloem parenchyma, companion cells and sie ve tubes;   xylem vessels often in  CXVIII  multiples of 3 to 8 in radial rows;  medullary rays  prominent, pith parenchymatous; some pith cells contain small, 
cluster crystals of calcium oxalate and most peripheral pith cells contain many  small starch grains. 
 
Leaf –  
 
Petiole -TS almost circular in outline; epidermal cells thick walled, s mall and rectangular; cuticle present, a single 
layer of collenchyma followed by 6 to 8 layers of angular parenchyma ; pericycle sclerenchymatous as a 
discontinuous ring; stele is a ring; the phloem layer surrounds the xylem;  pith parenchym atous. 
 
Midrib - TS of the midrib shows an epidermis with a thin cuticle; it is f ollowed by a small group of polygonal 
parenchymatous cells of 5 to 8 layers, with a part of palisade from  the lamina on either side; stele is an interrupted 
ring, with vascular bundle in a crescent shape on the abaxial side an d smaller one forming an arc on the adaxial 
side, parenchymatous patches in between; both have a sclerenchymatous c ap followed by phloem and xylem; the 
protoxylem faces towards the central parenchymatous pith, 5 to 7 layer s of parenchymatous cells form the ground 
tissue between stele and the abaxial epidermis.  
 
Lamina  -Upper epidermis followed by 2 or 3 layers of palisade cells; the m esophyll tissue has loosely arranged 
circular cells with lot of intercellular spaces; small clus ter crystals of calcium oxalate present throughout the lamina; 
some cells of the lamina contain yellowish brown oil droplets; stomata  anomocytic.  
 
Powder - Yellowish brown, microscopy shows rosettes of calcium oxalate cryst als 24 to 30 µ across and prisms; 
globular starch grains of about 7 µ across; brownish and yellowish brown resinous pieces; stone cells of 35 to 75 µ 
length; fibres of about 15 µ width; spiral, annular, reticulate, scalariform and simple and border ed pitted vessels; 
fragments of tracheids and epidermis with anomocytic stomata.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
 
Foreign matter  -  Not more than   2     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash   -  Not more than   6     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -  Not more than   0.4  per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  -  Not less than     5     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  -  Not less than     3     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7  
T.L.C. - 
  
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate  (0.2 mm thick) using 
hexane:chloroform:methanol (7.5:2:0.5) after spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent and heating at 
105 o for 5 minutes  shows spots at   R f  0.14 (grey), 0.2 (light violet), 0.32 (pink), 0.52 (light brown), 0. 66 (violet), 
0.73 (pink) and 0.88 (light pink).  
  
CONSTITUENTS – Alkaloids; toddaline, toddalinine, skimmianine and berberine. Other constituents include  
citric acid, an oil, resin, pectin and starch. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa : Ka °u, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : P ¢cana, D ¤pana, ¹¤tapra ºamana, ¹othaghna,   CXIX    Svedana  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES -  Agnim āndya (Digestive impairment), Kaphav ¢tavy ¢dhi 
(Disorders due to Kapha and Vata), Angamarda (Body ache), Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), Jvara 
(Fever),  K ¨mi (Worm infestation), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of skin), Vi ¾amajavara 
(Intermitten fever) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 0.5 to 2 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CXX KE ¹¹ ¹¹AR ¡¡ ¡¡JA (Whole Plant) 
 Ke ºar ¢ja consists of dried whole plant excluding root of Wedelia chinensis  Merril Syn. Wedelia 
calendulacea  Less (Fam. Asteraceae), a procumbent, perennial herb with light c amphor-like odour, 0.3-0.9 m 
height, distributed in wet places throughout the country in plains.   
 
SYNONYMS –  Pitabh ¨¬ gar ¢ja, Avanti  
  
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
Stem - 2 to 4 mm in diameter; flat, nodes and internodes prominent, rooting at the  lower nodes; slightly hairy; 
blackish brown in colour; fracture, short; slightly pungent in taste.    
 
Leaf - Opposite, subsessile, linear-oblong, oblanceolate, margin entire, scabrous  with short white hairs or more or 
less glabrous; base tapering; dark green, odourless, tasteless; bot h fresh and dry leaves leave black stain on the 
fingers, when crushed as such or with water.  
 
Flower - Heads solitary on long slender axillary peduncles with ray and dis c florets, involucre bracts large, oblong 
obtuse, much longer than the disc floret; ray florets female, ligul ate, ligule 2 or 3 toothed, yellow, style long acute 
and recurved; fruit achene, triquetrous, tip truncate, disc floret bise xual, tubular, limb elongated, five toothed, 
anther syngenceous, epipetalous, filament fine with hairy tips, style  long, acute and fruit characters are the same as 
in ray floret; no pappus.    
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Stem  – TS almost circular in outline, cuticle thin, some epidermal cell s filled with yellowish contents, followed by 
3 to 5 layers of collenchymatous hypodermis; cortex aerenchymatous, wit h large intercellular spaces, endodermis 
and pericycle distinct, latter in the form of sclerenchymatous ca p over vascular bundles, cambium distinct, phloem 
consists of sieve tubes, companion cells and phloem parenchyma, xylem in the form of a continuous ring, pith 
large, collenchymatous with cells showing a little thickening at the angles.   
 
Leaf – 
Midrib -  TS slightly convex in outline on the upper side, more convexed on the lower  side, upper and lower 
epidermis covered by thin cuticle, 4 to 6 and 2 or 3 layers of collenchy ma present adjacent to upper and lower 
epidermis respectively, bicollateral vascular bundles, 3 to 5 in numbe r one median large and 2 or 4 lateral small, Ben. : Bhrangaraja 
Hin. : Pilaabhangraa 
Kan. : Kalsarji, Gargari 
Mal. : Mannakkannunni 
Ori. : Kesandara 
Tam. : Manjalkarilaamkanni, Paatalai Kayyaantakarai 
Tel. : Paccha guntagalijeru  CXXI  distinct sclerenchymatous bundle sheath present top and bottom of the bundle, xy lem and phloem consist of usual 
elements, mesophyll parenchymatous, some cells filled with druces and rhomboidal cry stals of calcium oxalate. 
 
Lamina  - Dorsiventral; both upper and lower epidermis covered with thin cutic le, in surface view both epidermis 
show an isocytic to anisocyctic stomata, 2 types of trichomes, (i)  long, unicellular, walls warty, with 9 to 12 
radiating basal epidermal cells, (ii) small 3 to 5 celled, basa l epidermal cells not differentiated; upper epidermis 
followed by single layered palisade parenchyma, spongy parenchyma 6 to 8 layered, loosely arranged; mesophyll 
traversed by a large number of veins, idioblasts containing druses a nd rhomboidal crystals of calcium oxalate 
present in this region, palisade ratio 3 or 4 vein islet 2 to 5 /mm 2 and vein termination numbers 5 to 9 /mm 2 while 
trichome numbers 3 to 9 and stomatal index 12 to 14 on upper surface and 22 to 25 on lower surface of the leaf. 
 
Powder – Yellowish green, pleasant smell and bitter taste, on microscopic e xamination unicellular and 
multicellular trichomes; patches of epidermal cells of leaf with anisocy tic stomata, idioblasts containing druses and 
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate, palisade cells,  groups of papillate epidermal cells of petals and bracts, 
endothelial cells, parenchymatous cells of anther lobe, pollen grains, a colpate, upto 10 µ in diameter  with spinous 
exine, fibres of bundle sheath and pericycle, tracheids and vessels wi th spiral, scalariform and reticulate secondary 
wall thickenings. 
 
IDENTITY PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter  -  Not more than     2      per cent,    Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash   -  Not more than   9.5     per cent,    Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -  Not more than     1      per cent,    Appendix 2.2.4   
Alcohol-soluble extractive -  Not less than     17      per cent,    Appendix 2.2.6   
Water-soluble extractive -  Not less than     31      per cent,    Appendix 2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
 T.L.C. of methanolic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate (0.2 mm thick ) using ethyl acetate : methanol : water  
(7:3:1) and on spraying with anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid reagent  and heating the plate at 105 ° for 10 min., spots 
appear at 0.47 (light yellow), 0.58 (light grey), 0.75 (blackish grey), 0.81 (light grey), 0.89 (yellowish organge), 
0.92 (light grey). 
  CXXII  CONSTITUENTS – Coumestan, norwedelic acid, norwedelolactone, tri-O -methylwedelolactone and β-amyrin.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KETAK ££££ (Stilt 
Root)  
 
       Ketak ¤ 
consists of the 
stilt roots of 
Pandanus 
odoratissimus 
Roxb. Syn. P. fascicularis Lamk. P. tectorius Soland. ex Parkinson (Fam. Pandanaceae), a densely br anched 
shurb, rarely erect, found along the coasts of India and  in Andaman islands, forming a belt of dense, impenetrable 
vegetation above the high water mark. 
 
SYNONYMS –  Ketaka, Raja ªpu ¾pa, S ¦cipu ¾pa, T ¨´ aº¦nya  
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES-  
 
Ben. : Keya, Keori 
Eng. : Fragrant Screwpine, Screwpine, Caldera Bush 
Guj. : Kewado 
Hin. : Keora, Kevadaa, Kewda  
Kan. : Thaale hou, Kedagi 
Mal. : Tazha,Taalampu 
Mar. : Kevdaa 
Ori. : Ketoki, Kia 
Pun. : Kevda 
Tam. : Tazampu,Tazhai,Talai 
Tel. : Mogali, Mogili 
Urd. : Kewdaa 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
a) Macroscopic:  PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa : Ka °u, Tikta, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a : T¤k¾´ a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka : Katu 
Karma : V¢tahara, Kaphahara, M ¦trala, H ¨dya, V ¨¾ ya, Svedakara, Ke ºya,   
   Balya 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Graha ´¤mihira taila, A ºokagh ¨ta, B ¨hat  
                                                              Vi ¾amajvar ¢ntaka lauha 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Ar śa (Piles), Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), Daurbalya (Weakness), H ¨droga 
(Heart disease), Indralupta (Alopecia), Jvara (Fever), K ¨/uniF023mi (Helminthiasis), K āmal ā 
(Jaundice), K āsa (Cough), P¢´ ²u (Anaemia), Pl ¤h¢v¨ddhi (Splenomegaly), Sirah º¦ la (Head 
ache), Slipada (Fliariasis), Striroga, Śū la (Pain / Colic), Śvāsa (Asthma), Vra ´a (Ulcer) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder) : 3 to 6 g. 
  CXXIII  Drug consists of chopped pieces of thick stilt roots,  surface smooth bearing projections of circular root 
scars; colour ashy brown, cut surface pale brown; fracture fibrous; no characteristic odour or taste. 
 
b) Microscopic:  
Stilt root  - Cuticle thick; epidermis a single layer of tabula r cells; cortex wide, outer zone of cortex consisti ng of 
irregular, loose, small polygonal, fairly thick wal led parenchyma cells; inner zone consists of larger thin walled, 
circular, more compact parenchyma cells with small to wide sca ttered air chambers; numerous group of fibres 
present; stele consists of a distinct endodermis and a pericyclic  layer, followed by phloem; ground tissue 
parenchymatous, numerous circular scattered xylem elements. 
Powder - Brownish powder, revealing the presence of parenc hyma cells, fibres with 400 to 600 µ length, lumen 12 to 
16 µ width, some upto 700 µ in length; occasionally broad and narrow vessel elements with elong ated pits are also 
seen. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH  - 
Foreign matter - Not more than    2   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash - Not more than    4    per cent,    Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid - insoluble ash - Not more than    0.1  per cent,    Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol - soluble extractive  - Not less than     4     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Water - soluble extractive - Not less than     8     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7 
Fixed oil - Not less than     2     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
  T.L.C. of chloroform extract on aluminium plate p recoated with silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  of 0.2 mm thickness using 
toluene: ethyl acetate  (5:1.5) under UV 254 nm shows spots at R f 0.13, 0.47, 0.71, 0.76 and 0.80 (all green). Under UV 
366 nm fluorescent zones appear at R f. 0.27, 0.31, 0.36, 0.44 0.56, 0.71, and 0.76 (all blue). On exposure to iodine 
vapours  shows spots at R f. 0.13, 0.21, 0.50, 0.61, 0.73 and 0.98 (all brown) . On dipping in vanillin -sulphuric acid 
reagent  and on heating at 105° for 5 minutes spots appear at R f. 0.16, 0.22, 0.27, 0.32, 0.48, 0.54, 0.70, 0.75, 0.89 and  
0.96 (all grey). 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Physcion; p-hydroxybenzoic acid, cirsilineol, n-triacontanol, β-sitosterol,                                    
Stigmasterol, campesterol, daucosterol, stigmast-4- en-3,6-dione, andamarine, piperidine. 
 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa  : Tikta, Ka ¾¢ ya, Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, Snigdha 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma 
 : Balya, Dehad ¢r²hyakara, H ¨dya, Pitta º¢maka, Ras ¢yana,                                      
  Stambhana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS –  Ketak ¤, Ketaki Pakvaphala Guna, Ketaki guna, Ketaka 
Gunah, Kevika Guna   CXXIV  Gunah, Kevika Guna  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES-  Gulma (Abdominal lump), Jvara (Fever); M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), 
Pradara (Excessive vaginal discharge), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), Tvakroga (Skin 
diseases) 
 
DOSE –  C ¦r´a (Powder): 1 to 2 g. 
               Kv ¢tha (Decoction): 30 to 50 ml. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CXXV K££££¯¯ ¯¯AM ¡¡ ¡¡R££££ (Leaf) 
 
              K¤°am ¢r¤ consists of the leaves of Aristolochia bracteolata Lam. Syn. A. bracteata Retz. (Fam. 
Aristolochiaceae), a slender, decumbent, glabrous p erennial, occurring in plains throughout India. 
 
SYNONYMS - ¹¨¬gapu ¾p¤, K ¤t¢ri, Dh ¦mrapatr ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. :  Kiramar  
Eng. :  Bracteated birthwort 
Guj. :  Kidaamaari 
Hin. :  Kitmaar, Kiramar, Kitmaari, Kidaamaari 
Kan. :  Kathhekirubanagida 
Mal. :  Aduthinapalai, Atu-tinlap 
Mar. :  Kidaamaari, Kidemaar 
Ori. :  Paaniri 
Pun. :  Kitamar 
Tam. :  Aadu-tinna-paalai  
Tel. :  Gadida gadapa, Tella iswari 
 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
 Leaves very variable in size, reniform or broadly ovate,  cordate at base with a wide shallow sinus, 
crenulate, undulate, glabrous above and glaucous beneath, finely reticulately veined; petiole 1 to 2.5 cm long, 
nerves impressed; taste bitter, feebly aromatic when cru shed, but not characteristic. 
 
b) Microsocopic: 
 
Leaf- 
 
Petiole -  TS almost angular in outline, with one depression o n the upper and two depressions on the lower 
surface; epidermis single layered followed by 3 or 4 rows of c ollenchyma; below the ridges about 4 or 5 layers of 
chlorenchyma present; vascular bundles five in number arranged in a shallow arc; ground tissue 
parenchymatous. 
Midrib -  Midrib shows a slightly convex outline adaxially, and alm ost circular abaxially; epidermal cells single 
layered; the upper and lower sub-epidermal region c omposed of 2 to 4 layers of collenchyma; a single 
vascular strand present; ground tissue is made up o f parenchyma cells; unicellular epidermal hairs pre sent on 
abaxial epidermis. 
Lamina -  TS shows dorsiventral structure; epidermis single layered, compos ed of rectangular cells; trichome 
occasional on upper surface, simple and unicellular ; palisade single layer; spongy tissue composed of loos ely 
packed circular to oval cells; vascular strands presen t; stomata anomocytic, present on both epidermis; in  
surface view, adaxial epidermal cells straight wall ed, but abaxial cells rather wavy; stomatal number 6 to 9 /  CXXVI  mm 2 for adaxial epidermis and 23 to 27 / mm 2 for abaxial epidermis ; stomatal index for adaxial epidermis 6 to 12 
and for abaxial epidermis 16 to 24; palisade ratio 5 or 6; vein islet number 8 to 12. 
Powder - Greyish green, shows the presence of palisade cells , fragments of epidermis with straight or 
slightly wavy walls and anomocytic stomata, parench yma and collenchyma cells seen, vessels with 
helical, mostly scalariform and occasionally pitted  thickenings on walls observed. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
Foreign matter  - Not more than      2    per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2  
Total ash  - Not more than    10    per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  - Not more than    1.3    per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than      12.8    per cent,   Appendix 2.2 .6  
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than      25.5    per cent,   Appendix 2.2 .7  
Fixed oil - Not less than        5.3    per cent,   Appendix 2. 2.8 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
 T.L.C. of methanolic extract on precoated aluminium silica gel  ‘G ’ 60 F 254  plate of 0.2 mm thickness 
using toluene: ethyl acetate: formic acid  (5:1.5:0.5) under UV 366 nm shows fluorescent spots at R f. 0.15 (blue), 
0.20 (white), 0.26 (white), 0.36 (blue), 0.43 (pink) , 0.46 (pink), 0.49 (blue), 0.56 (light pink), 0.62 (bluish pink), 
0.66 (dark blue), 0.74 (blue), 0.79 (pink), 0.86 (pink), 0.91 (pink), 0.96 (dark blue). Under UV 254 nm spots  appear 
at R f 0.20, 0.36, 0.49, 0.56, 0.75, 0.86, 0.96 (all green). On dipping in vanillin - sulphuric acid  and heating the 
plate for 5 minutes at 105° shows  spots at R f. 0.15, 0.20, 0.26, 0.36, 0.43, 0.46, 0.49, 0.56,0.62, 0.66, 0.74,0.79, 
0.86,0.91, 0.96 (all grey). 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Aristolochic acid; magnoflorine; N-acetylnornuciferine;  
aristolactam;  β-sitosterol and ceryl alcohol. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
 
Rasa  
: Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a, T ¤k¾´a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma 
 : D ¤pana, Garbh ¢sayottejaka, Kapahara, K ¢sahara, K ¨mighna, Ku ¾°haghna, Rucya, V ¢tahara, 
Virecana, Vi ¾aghna, Vra ´aºodhana 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Kitamari Gunah, K ¤°am ¢r¤gu ´aª 
  
THERAPEUTIC USES-  K ¨mi (Worm infestation), Ka ¾°¢ rtava (Dysmenorrhoea), Sandhi º¦la, ¹¤tapitta 
(Urticaria), ¹otha (Oedema), Tvakroga, Vi ¾amajvara (Intermittent fever), Vicarcika (Dry and weeping 
eczema), Vra ´a (Ulcer) 
 
DOSE -  C ¦r´a (Powder):  1 to 3 g. 
  CXXVII  KUM ¡¡ ¡¡R££££VETRA (Rhizome) 
 
 Kum ¢r¤vetra consists of the rhizomes of Calamus thwaitesii  Becc. (Fam. Arecaceae), an unarmed, erect or 
high climbing cane palm without stout stem, common in the evergreen forests of Weste rn Ghats. 
 
SYNONYMS –  Su ¾ira k ¢´² aª 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Kan. : Jeddu betta, Kumaari  bettha 
Mal. : Valiya chural 
Mar. : Veta 
Tam. : Vanchi 
 
DESCRIPTION-  
a) Macroscopic: 
 
 Drug consists of chopped pieces of rhizome with a few intact roots; bark dark brown and smooth; external 
surface shows remnants of root scars; cut surface reddish brown; fracture, fibrous;  no characteristic taste or odour. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Rhizome  – Epidermis single layered, followed by a hypodermis of 5 to 6 layers of  sclerenchymatous fibres; cortex  
shows 3 regions of parenchyma zones; a few outer layers are loosel y arranged and circular; in most of the middle 
layers, they are elongated with scattered groups of fibres and thos e in the inner most layers again circular and 
loosely arranged similar to the outermost; cortex separated from the stelar region by 2 or 3 layers of laterally 
elongated parenchymatous cells; stelar region is made up of parenchy matous ground tissue; vascular bundles 
present in patches, with a large cap of sclerenchyma fibres towa rds peripheral side and a smaller patch of thick 
walled parenchyma towards interior; phloem tissue present above ves sels; silica bodies also observed in the phloem 
region; starch grain present throughout the parenchymatous ground tissue. 
 
Powder - Brownish, parenchyma cells circular, elongated or irregular shape d; scalariform vessels elements, 
tubercled silica bodies, simple circular starch grains up to 35 µ pr esent; fibres thick walled with narrow lumen and 
thin walled with broad lumen observed. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
  
Foreign matter                -  Not more than   2       per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash      -  Not more than   6       per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash    -   Not more than   3       per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive               -   Not more than    8       per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive   -   Not more than   7       per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7 
Fixed oil      -   Not more than   0.98  per cent,   Appendix 2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. - 
 
 T.L.C. of chloroform extract on aluminium plate precoated with silica  gel ‘G’ F 254  of 0.2 mm thickness 
using toluene : ethyl acetate  (9:1 ) under UV 254 nm  shows  spots at  R f.  0.13, 0.18, 0.27, 0.33, 0.49, 0.56 and  CXXVIII  0.82 (all green). Under UV 366nm fluorescent zones appear at R f. 0.29, 0.38, 0.49, 0.60 and 0.98 (all blue). On 
dipping vanillin-sulphuric acid  and heating at 105° for five minutes,  spots appear at R f. 0.16 (pink), 0.26 (grey), 
0.33 (blue), 0.44 (pink), 0.56 (pink) 0.62 (grey), 0.76 (grey), 0.80 (pink) and 0.88 (blue). 
 
CONSTITUENTS – No report on the chemical consitituents of the rhizome is available. 
 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -  
Rasa : Ka ¾¢ ya, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta  
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : D ¢hapra ºamana, Gr ¢h¤, Jvaraghna,     
  Ku ¾°haghna, Pittahara, Vra ´ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS –  Used as single drug 
  
THERAPEUTIC USES -  Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), Jvara (Fever),  Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of 
skin), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder ), Visarpa (Erysepales), 
Vra ´a (Ulcer)   
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 3 to 6 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CXXIX  KUSUMBHA (Fruit) 
 
 Kusumbha consists of dried fruits of Carthamus  tinctorius L. (Fam. Asteraceae), an erect annual herb, 30 
to 90 cm high with spinously serrate leaves, cultivated throughout India  for the oil from fruits and a dye from 
flowers. 
   
SYNONYMS –  P ¢vakam, Vahni ºikham, Vastrarañjana 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES - 
 
Ben. : Kusum, Barre 
Eng. : Safflower, Parrot seed, Bastard saffron 
Guj. : Kusumbo, Kusumbi, Karad 
Hin. : Kusum, Barre 
Kan. : Kusubeegida, Kusumekalu  
Mal. : Chendurakam, Kuyimpu 
Mar. : Kardai, Kardi  
Ori. : Kusum  
Pun. : Kusam, Kartum 
Tam. : Kusumbaa, Sendurakam,  Senturakam 
Tel. : Kusuma 
Urd. : Qurtum 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
Fruit 8 to 12 mm long and 5 to 8 mm broad achenes, compressed, faintly ribbe d, muriculate, creamy, 
tapering into a beak which is suddenly dilated into a whitish cup-lik e disc beneath the pappus; seed small, 
albuminous, oval, slightly flattened on lateral sides 6 to 10 mm long a nd 4 to 6 mm broad, enclosed in the 
achene with a thin and papery seed coat; surface rough, orangeish brown and slightly acrid i n taste. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
           TS oval in outline, pericarp enclosing the seed; pericarp differentiated i nto epicarp consisting of a single 
layer of thick walled, pitted, lignified cells with semilunar t hickening on outer radial walls; mesocarp consists 
of stone cells of varying shapes and sizes, 5 to 6 cells deep in the middle and 18 to 20 cells de ep at the chalazal 
end; endocarp 3 or 4 cells deep and differentiated from mesocarp by a s ingle layered oil containing cells; testa 
single layered with thick palisade like cells, with prominent l inea lucida, followed by tegmen; tegmen consists 
of  a single layered parenchymatous outer epidermis, followed by 4 to 6 cells deep reticulated parenchymatous 
mesophyll with prismatic crystals; inner epidermis of tegmen l ignified and single layered; a single vascular 
bundle extends upto the micropyle; the endosperm cells rectangular.   
 
Powder– Creamish  brown, microscopy shows, pitted cells of epicarp, patches of sclerenchym atous stone cells 
of varying shapes and sizes from pericarp, reticulate parenchyma of mesophyll; parenchymatous cells of 
endosperm containing aleurone grains; oil cells, palisade like cell s of testa; thick walled epidermal cells of 
inner epidermis of tegmen. 
  CXXX IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter               -    Not more than   2      per cent,   Appendix  2.2.2 
Total ash   -    Not more than   4.5   per cent,   Appendix  2.2.3   
Acid-insoluble ash  -    Not more than   1      per cent,   Appendix  2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive -    Not less than      7     per cent,   Appendix  2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive -    Not less than      8     per cent,   Appendix  2.2.7   
      
T.L.C. – 
 
T.L.C. of methanolic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate (0.2 mm thick ) using toluen : ethyl acetat : formic acid  
(7:3:0.5) under UV light 254 nm shows spots at R f. 0.26, 0.38 0.53 and 0.70. On spraying with anisaldehyde 
sulphuric acid reagent  and heating the plate for 10 minutes at 105 o, spots appear at R f. 0.27 (grey), 0.35 (brown), 
0.48 (faint grey), 0.52 (grey), 0.70 (brown), 0.73 (bluish black) and 0.81(bluish black). 
 
CONSTITUENTS – Lignan glucoside ( matairesinol, monoglucoside), glucose, maltose, raffinose, luteol in-7-O-
glucoside, N-(P-coumaroyl) tryptamine, campesterol, cholesterol, ß-sitoster ol and its glucoside, ∆7 –stigmasterol, 
myristo-oleo-linolein, myristodilinolein, palmitooleolinolein, palmito-dilinolei n, stearo-oleolinolein, stearo-
dilinolein, dioleolinolein, oleo-dilinolein, trilinolein. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION –  
 
Rasa : Madhura, Ka ¾ay ¢, Tikta, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Snigdha, Guru 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : M ¦trala, Sarvado ¾aprakopaka, Svedajanana,  
  Vid ¢h¤, Virecana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Kusumbham Guna, Kusumbhatailagu ´a, Kusumbha 
Tail Guna, Kusumbha Guna, Kusumbh Guna  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - ¡mav ¢ta (Rheumatism), A ºmar ¤ (Calculus), Daurbalya (Weakness), 
Kāmal ā (Jaundice), Ka ¾°¢ rtava (Dysmenorrhoea), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), Prati ºy¢ya 
(Coryza), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 2 to 4 g.  
 
 
 
 
 
  CXXXI  KUSUMBHA (Leaf) 
 
  Kusumbha consist of dried leaves of Carthamus tinctorius L. (Fam. Asteraceae), an erect annual herb, 30 
to 90 cm high with spinously serrate leaves, cultivated throughout India, for it s fruits that yield edible oil and a dye 
from flowers. 
   
SYNONYMS –  P ¢vaka, Vastrara ®jana, Kausumbha 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass. :   Akharij, Jhartam 
Ben. :   Kusum phool 
Eng. :   Safflower, Bastard saffron 
Guj. :   Kusumbo 
Hin. :   Kusum, Kusumb 
Kan. :   Kusubbi, Kasube 
Mal. :   Kuyimpu, Chentukam 
Mar. :   Kardi, Kardai 
Ori. :   Kusum 
Pun. :   Kusum 
Tam. :   Senturkam 
Tel. :   Kusumulu 
Urd. :   Kusum 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
Leaf– Sessile, oblong or ovate-lanceolate, spinously serrate, waxy, entire, dark green on upper side and pale green 
on lower side.  
  
b) Microscopic: 
Midrib-  TS shows an outline that is deeply convex on the abaxial side and slightly convex, on the adaxial side; 1 or 
2 layered upper and a single layered lower epidermis covered exter nally with striated, thick cuticle and interrupted 
by  glandular and non-glandular trichomes; glandular trichomes more on the  lower side; ground tissue 
differentiated into 3 or 4 layered collenchymatous tissue followed by 2 or 3 l ayered parenchyma on both upper and 
lower sides of vascular bundle; vascular bundle single, median, closed, followed by 3 or 4 and 8 to 10 layers  of 
thick sclerenchymatous cells capping the vascular bundle on upper and low er side respectively; xylem vessels in 
radial rows on upper side; phloem 3 or 4 layered in sclerenchymatous re gion; idioblasts filled with rosette crystal 
of calcium oxalate.  
 
Lamina - Isobilateral; both upper and lower epidermis covered with thick stri ated cuticle; surface views of both 
epidermis show unicellular to multicellular ordinary trichomes wit h acute apex as well as glandular trichomes that 
are club shaped with single celled stalk and 4 to 8 celled, head; ce ll walls of both the epidermis straight; anisocytic 
stomata present on lower side; palisade parenchyma 2 or 3 layered; spongy parenchyma 3 to 6 layers deep and 
loosely arranged; mesophyll traversed by a number of veins; showing the vascular bundles surrounded by 
sclerenchymatous bundle sheath. Palisade ratio 3 or 4, vein islet no. 6 to 11 /mm 2 and vein termination 6 to 14/mm 2 
respectively, stomatal index 23 to 30 on the upper surface and 25 to 33 on the lower surface of the lea f.  
 
Powder – Green in colour, on microscopic examination shows non glandular unicellular to multicellula r trichomes 
with acute apex; club shaped grandular trichomes with single celled stalk and 4 to 8 celled head; lower epidermis  CXXXII  with anisocytic stomata; idioblast with rosette crystals of c alcium oxalate; patches of sclerenchyma from bundle 
sheath; fibres; vessels with scalariform thickenings and palisade cells .        
  
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter               -  Not more than   2   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash   -  Not more than 19   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -  Not more than   2   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive -  Not less than   20   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive -  Not less than   23   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
        T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate  (0.2 mm thick) using toluene: ethyl acetate  
(8:2) shows fluorescent zones of red colour at R f. 0.32, 0.40, 0.54, 0.69, 0.83 under UV 366 nm.  
 
CONSTITUENTS – Hinesol-β-D-fucopyranoside, 1-pentadecene. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
Rasa   :  Madhura, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a  :  R ¦k¾a, Laghu 
V¤¤¤¤rya  :  U ¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka              :  Ka °u 
Karma  :  V ¢takara, Pittakara, Kaphahara, D ¤pana, Madan ¢º aka, Balya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Kusumbham Guna, Kusumbhatailagu ´a, Kusumbha Tail Guna, Kusumbha 
Guna, Kusumbh Guna  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - Aºmar ¤ (Calculus), Badhirya (Deafness), Daurbalya (Weakness), M ¦trak ¨cchra 
(Dysuria), Mutravikara (Urinary diseases), Netraroga (Dise ases of the eye), Pralapa (Delirium), Prameha 
(Metabolic disorder), Raktav ¤k¢ra (Disorders of blood), Yoniroga (Disease of female genital tra ct), Pradara 
(Excessive vaginal discharge) 
 
DOSE- C ¦r´a (Powder):  2 to 4 g. 
 
 
 
  CXXXIII  KUSUMBHA (Flower head) 
 
  Kusumbha consist of dried flower heads of Carthamus tinctorius L. (Fam. Asteraceae), an erect annual 
herb, 30 to 90 cm high with spinously serrate leaves, cultivated throughout  India, for its fruits that yield edible oil 
and a dye from flowers. 
   
SYNONYMS –  P ¢vaka, Vastrara ®jana, Kausumbha 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass.            :   Akharij, Jhartam 
Ben.            :   Kusum phool 
Eng.            :   Safflower, Bastard saffron 
Guj.            :   Kusumbo 
Hin.            :   Kusum, Kusumb 
Kan.           :   Kusubbi, Kasube 
Mal.           :   Kuyimpu, Chentukam 
Mar.           :   Kardi, Kardai 
Ori.            :   Kusum 
Pun.           :   Kusum 
Tam.          :   Senturkam, Kusumb 
Tel.            :   Kusumulu 
Urd.            :   Kusum   
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic:   
Orangeish yellow, cylindrical capitulum 1 to 3 cm long, usually sess ile, solitary or sometimes in small 
distant clusters on long, slender, leafless branches; outer involucral  bracts, green 2 to 3 cm in length and 1 to 2 cm 
in breadth, ovate, acute, with broad scarious margins; inner bracts li near – oblong, subobtuse, with scarious 
margins; ligules narrow, shortly and bluntly 5-toothed at apex; flowers  differentiated into three types of florets- 
ray, disc and neuter; ray florets – 3.0 to 4.0 cm long, peripheral, sessile, bracteate, pistillate, petals 5, gamopetalous 
with valvate aestivation, ovary bicarpellary, syncarpous, unilocular , with single ovule, placentation basal, style 
simple, 2 to 3.0 cm long; disc florets – calyx and corolla similar to rayflore ts, usually male, 5 stamens, epipetalous, 
alternating with petals, anther syngenesious, introrse, longitudinally dehiscing; neuter florets – peripheral, 3.0 to 
4.0 cm long, calyx pappus like on base, petals 5, 0.5 to 0.6 cm long, gamopetalous, linear in shape, androec ium and 
gynoecium as rudimentary organs; fruit achene upto 1 cm in length, compr essed, faintly ribbed, muriculate, 
tapering into a beak which is suddenly dilated into a whitish cup-like disk beneath the pa ppus.     
 
b) Microscopic:  
Bracts- 
Midrib-  TS shows an outline deeply convex on the abaxial and slightly convex on the  adaxial side; 1 or 2 layered 
upper and a single layered lower epidermis covered externally wit h striated, thick cuticle and interrupted by  
glandular and non-glandular trichomes; glandular trichomes more on the low er side; mesophyll differentiated into 
3 or 4 layered collenchymatous tissue followed by 2 or 3 layered parenc hyma on both the upper and lower sides of 
vascular bundle; vascular bundle single, median, closed; sclerenchymat ous cells cap the vascular bundle on upper 
and lower side; xylem in radial rows on upper side; phloem 3 or 4 layer ed; idioblast filled with rosette crystal of 
calcium oxalate in the sclerenchymatous region.  
  CXXXIV  Lamina - Isobilateral; both upper and lower epidermis covered with thick stri ated cuticle surface views of both 
epidermis show non-glandular, unicellular trichome with acute apex and cl ub shaped glandular trichome with 
single celled stalk and 4 to 8 celled head, cell walls of both the epidermis straight, anisocytic stomata present on 
lower side; palisade parenchyma 2 or 3 layered; spongy parenchyma 3 t o 6 layer deep and loosely arranged, 
mesophyll traversed by number of veins with vascular bundles surrounded by  a sclerenchym atous bundle sheath.  
 
Powder- Yellowish green, on microscopic examination shows groups of angular epider mal cells with stomata of 
bracts, unicellular non-glandular, unicellular trichome with acute apex and club shaped glandular trichome with 
single celled stalk and 4 to 8 celled head; trichomes; round, tetrapor ate, pollen grains 22 to 27 µ in dia.; oil cells 
from seeds, and wavy epidermal cells of petals; stone cells, thi n walled and reticulate parenchyma from seed, thick 
walled parenchyma of peduncle and vessels; pollen grains round, tetraporate, 20 to 27 µ in dia. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter   -  Not more than 2  per cent, Appendix 2.2.2   
Total ash   -  Not more than 7  per cent, Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -  Not more than 1  per cent, Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive -  Not less than   6   per cent, Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive -  Not less than 14   per cent, Appendix 2.2.7 
 
 T.L.C. –  
 
T.L.C of methanolic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate (0.2 mm thick) using toluene: ethyl acetate : formic acid 
(7:3:0.5) under UV light 254 nm shows  spots at R f. 0.13, 0.22 0.27, 0.38 and 0.45. On spraying with anisaldehyde-
sulphuric acid reagent  and heating the plate for 10 min. at 105 °, spots appear at R f.  0.19 (yellow) 0.37 (blue) 0.56 
(purple), 0.67 (purple) and 0.89 (purple). 
 
CONSTITUENTS –  Contains a dye of flavonoid, Carthamin. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa  :  Madhura, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a  :  R ¦k¾a, Laghu 
V¤¤¤¤rya  :  Ka °u 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka  :  U ¾´ a 
Karma  :  Kaphahara, Svedajanana, D ¤pana, Ke ºara ®jana, Vi ¾aghna 
 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Godh ¢vi ¾acikits ¢, Yoga Kusumb ªa Yoga, Kusumbham Guna, 
Kusumbhatailagu ´a, Kusumbha Tail Guna, Kusumbha Guna, Kusumbh Guna  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Ka ¾°¢ rtava (Dysmenorrhoea), K āsa (Cough), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), Prati ºyāya 
(Coryza), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), Romantika (Measles), Śvāsa (Asthma), Visphotake (Blisterous  eruption),  
Yoniroga (Disease of female genital tract) 
 
DOSE- C¦r´a (Powder):  2 to 4 g. 
 
  CXXXV LAGHU HARITAMA ¿¿ ¿¿JAR ££££ (Root) 
  
 L aghu haritama ®jar ¤ consist of roots of Acalypha fruticosa Forsk.(Fam. Euphorbiaceae), a strong smelling 
pubescent bushy shrub upto 2.5 m in height covered w ith yellow waxy glands commonly found in plains fro m 
Orissa to Tamilnadu, Karnataka and Kerala. 
 
SYNONYMS -  Laghu-Kupp ¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES -  
 
Hin. :  Chinni-Ka Jhar, Chinni 
Kan. :  Chinni, Chinnnimara, Chinnigida 
Mal. :   Sinni-maram 
Mar. :   Khokali 
Tam. :   Chinni  
Tel. :   Chinna kuppi 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic:  
 
 Root consists of long unbranched tap root with lat eral roots, cut into pieces of 3 to 5 cm in length 
and 0.75 to 1.5 cm in diameter; dark brown outside and cut surface yellowish; fracture, short; no 
characteristic odour and taste. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Root - Epiblema crushed; parenchymatous cortical cells shows the presenc e of laticifers and large druses; stone 
cell patches present; phloem narrow, phloem parench yma occasionally having druses; vessel circular, 
mostly solitary, sometimes in radial groups of 2 to 4 widely spac ed in a large zone of xylem    parenchyma; rays 
uniseriate to occasionally biseriate; pith parenchymatous , some cells contain large druses. 
 
Powder - Light brown, taste bitter, reticulate and pitted vessels, druses, stone cells, fibres and xylem 
parenchyma present. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter -  Not more than    2     per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash -  Not more than     4     per cent,  Appendix  2.2 .3 
Acid-insoluble ash -  Not more than    0.5  per cent,  Appendix  2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive -  Not less than      2     per cent, Appendix  2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive -  Not less than      5     per cent, Appendix  2.2.7 
Fixed oil -  Not less than       1    per cent,  Appendix  2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. - 
 
 T.L.C. of chloroform extract on aluminium plate pre coated with silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  of 0.2 mm thickness, 
using toluene:ethyl acetate:formic acid  ( 5:1.5: 0.5) under UV 366 nm shows  spots at R f. 0.5 (blue), 0.67  CXXXVI  (fluorescent blue), 0.83 (fluorescent green). Under  UV 254 nm spots appear at R f. 0.33, 0.39 (both green), 0.67 (pale 
blue), 0.89, 0.94 (both green). 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Arjunolic acid. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION- 
 
Rasa :  Tikta, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a :  Laghu, Snigdha 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka :  Ka °u  
Karma :  D ¤pana, Kaphahara, P ¢cana, Sra ¼sana,  
   Vamana, Vra ´a ropa ´a 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES -  Agnim āndya (Digestive impairment), Vra ´a (Ulcer)  
  
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 3 to 6 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CXXXVII  LAGHUPATRA VAR ½½ ½½¡¡ ¡¡BH ¥¥ ¥¥ (Whole Plant) 
 
Laghupatra var ½¢bh ¦ consists of the whole plant of Trianthema decandra  L. (Fam. Ficoidaceae 
(Aizoaceae), a much branched prostrate, procumbent annual herb, occurring as a weed all ove r peninsular India.  
  
SYNONYMS –  Dvij ¢y¢¬g¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES -  
 
Ben. : Gadabani, Goda-cani 
Hin. : Gadabani 
Kan. : Bilikomme,  Gaija soppu 
Mal. : Vellutha thazhuthama 
Mar. : Tultuli 
Ori. : Puruni saga 
Tam. : Vellai caranai  
Tel. : Tellagalijeru 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
 Root  -Cylindrical, gradually tapering, measuring upto 8 cm long and upto 0.5 cm i n thickness, surface brown, 
smooth, lateral roots sparse; fracture entire, fractured surface  smooth with a thin bark and central whitish wood; 
odour and taste indistinct. 
 
 Stem  -Herbaceous, sparsely branched, procumbent, angular and striate, surface g labrous, fracture entire; odour and 
taste indistinct. 
 
 Leaf  -Simple, opposite, unequal, petiolate, petioles 0.6 to 1.4 cm long, puberulous, amplexic aul at the base; lamina 
obovate, 1.5 to 25. cm broad and 2.0 to 2.5 cm long apiculate, tapering towards the base, margin entire, unicostate 
pinnate reticulate venation with 3 to 5 pairs of lateral veins, ada xial surface dark green and the abaxial one light 
green, glabrous, odour and taste indistinct. 
 
b) Microscopic - 
 
Root  -TS of root shows anomalous secondary growth with 6 to 8 seriate cork w ith rectangular, tangentially 
elongated cells; cork cambium present; cortex 3 or 4 seriate, compos ed of isodiametric, parenchymatous cells with 
intercellular spaces and containing rosettes of calcium oxalate c rystals; vascular tissue contains 5 to 6 rings of 
xylem, alternating with a ring of phloem; phloem rings comparative ly narrower; composed of sieve tubes with 
compound sieve plates, companion cells, phloem parenchyma and phloem fibres; xylem composed of vessels, and 
parenchyma; numerous xylem fibres measuring 10 to 15 µ in width and 200 to 310 µ in length; simple pits present; 
xylem parenchyma scanty. 
 
Stem  -TS shows no secondary growth and has epidermis single layered, composed of rectangular, tangentially 
elongated thin walled compactly arranged parenchymatous cells; cort ex made of 10 to 16 layers of thin walled, 
parenchymatous cells with intercellular spaces; some of the cort ical cells contain rosettes of calcium oxalate 
crystals; stele large with a narrow ring of vascular bundles and a wide central pith; 20 to 25 vascular bundles are  CXXXVIII  arranged in the form of a ring; vascular bundles conjoint, collateral , open and endarch.,  phloem present with sieve 
tubes, companion cells, phloem parenchyma and phloem fibres; xylem fibres and parenchyma scanty; pith is 
composed of thin walled, isodiametric,  parenchymatous cells possessing  intercellular spaces; some containing 
rosettes; medullary rays narrow.   
 
Leaf - 
 
Midrib  -TS shows a notch in the adaxial side and ridge on abaxial surface; epidermis with cuticl e, cell walls nearly 
straight or slightly wavy in surface view; ground tissue parenc hymatous; vascular bundle arranged in an arc,  
phloem abaxial and xylem adaxial, both xylem and phloem contain fibres, parenchyma, xylem vess els with annular 
and spiral thickenings; 
 
 
Lamina  -TS of lamina shows the presence of cuticle, an epidermis of tabular cells , palisade in a single row, spongy 
cells loosely arranged, parenchymatous; vascular bundle with a bundle s heath,  cells filled with eccentric starch 
grains; rosettes present in spongy layer, trichomes absent; stoma ta present on both upper and lower epidermis, 
more on lower epidermis, paracytic; epidermal cells in surface view polygonal, with straight or slightly wavy 
walls; stomatal index of adaxial epidermis 16 or 17 and that of abaxial  surface 18 or 19, costal cells elongated and 
narrow. 
 
Powder - Greenish grey, freely flowing, and contains polygonal epidermal cell s with slightly wavy walls as seen in 
surface view, paracytic stomata, xylem elements with annular a nd spiral thickenings, calcium oxalate rosettes 
(roots of T. portulacastrum  contain rosettes of calcium oxalate, and roots of Boerhaavia diffusa  show raphides, and 
prisms of starch grains). 
. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH  - 
 
Foreign matter            -   Not more than    2     per cent,  Appendix    2.2.2 
Total ash                                       -     Not more than   22    per cent,  Appendix    2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash    -    Not more than     8    per cent,  Appendix    2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive           -   Not less than     12    per cent,  Appendix    2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive             -    Not less than     27    per cent,  Appendix    2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. - 
 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate using n-hexane : ethyl acetate  (9:1) shows under UV 366 
nm spots at R f. values 0.16 (blue), 0.39 (violet), 0.69 (blue) and   0.74 (blue); on exposure to iodine vapour   spots 
appear at R f. values 0.16, 0.20, 0.39, 0.50, 0.69, 0.78 and 0.82, and on spraying with 5% methanolic sulphuric acid 
reagent  and heating the plate for 10 minutes at 105 ° spots appear with R f. values  0.16, 0.20, 0.39, 0.50, 0.58, 0.69, 
0.74, 0.78 and 0.82. 
 
CONSTITUENTS -  Saponins and alkaloid punarnavine.   
 
  CXXXIX   
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Kaphahara, M ¦trala, SrA ¼sana, ¹¦laghna 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug  
  
THERAPEUTIC USES- ¡mav ¢ta (Rheumatism), Apasm ¢ra (Epilepsy), Ardh ¢vabhedaka (Migrain / 
Hemicranin), H ¨dayaroga (Heart disease), K āmal ā (Jaundice), K ¢sa (Cough), P¢´² u (Anaemia), ¹otha 
(Oedema), ¹v¢sa (Asthma), Ura ªk¾ata (Chest wound), Vra ´a (Ulcer) 
 
DOSE –  C ¦r´a (Powder) : 3 to 6 g.  CXL  LOHITANIRY ¡¡ ¡¡SA (Exudate) 
 
  Lohitaniry ¢sa  consists of exudate of stem of Dracaena cinnabari Balf.  f.  (Fam. Agavaceae), a tall tree 
reaching upto to 8 m, found in the Indian Ocean island of Suqutra (Socotra), off the coast of  Somalia in Africa. It is 
imported into India. 
 
SYNONYMS – ¹onitavar ´¢, Lohita k ¾¤r¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES - 
 
Eng. : Dragon ΄s blood 
Guj. : Hiraadakhana 
Hin. : Hiraadokhi, Khoonkharaabaa 
Kan. : Khunkhaaraa 
Mal. : Kandamurgarittam 
Mar. : Khunkharaabaa 
Pun. : Khoonakharaabaa 
Tam. : Kandamurgarittam 
Urd. : Damm-ul- Akhwain 
DESCRIPTION - 
Macroscopic:  
Bright red coloured powder; odour and taste nil.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter  :  Not more than   2    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.2 
Total ash   : Not more than   2    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  :  Not more than   8    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive :   Not less than    95   per cent,   Appendix  2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  : Not less than    2     per cent,   Appendix  2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
Take 2 g of the powdered drug and extract with methanol (2 x 25 ml), by r efluxing on a water bath. Filter 
and concentrate the pooled extract. Adjust the volume to 10 ml with ethanol  and apply about 20 µl on precoated 
silica gel 60 F 254  plate (thickness 0.2 mm).  
 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate using choloroform:methanol (9.5:05) under UV 254  nm 
shows spots at R f. 0.15, 0.25 , 0.36,0.69,0.79 and 0.84; under 360nm shows spots at 0.16 (blue), 0.27 (blue), 0.38 
(blue) 0.44 (green), 0.73 (blue) and 0.79 (dark); and on spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and 
heating the plate for 5 minutes at 105 ° spots appear at R f0. 0.18 (purple), 0.27(yellow), 0.35 (orange), 0.45 (orange), 
0.57 (orange) 0.67 (orange), 0.78 (orange) and 0.82 (orange). 
 
CONSTITUENTS– 2-Hydroxychalcone,7-hydroxy-3-(3-hydroxy-4-methoxybenzyl)chroman, (2S)- 7,3'-
dihydroxy-4'-methoxyflavan and 4-hydroxy-2-methoxtdihydrochalcone  CXLI    
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Ka ¾¢ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Raktastambhana, Sa ¬gr ¢h¤, Vra ´aropa ´a 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), Prav ¢hik ¢ (Dysentery), Rakt ¢rºa (Bleeding 
piles), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), Rakta-Pradara (Menorrhag ia or Metrorrhagia or both), 
Raktasr ¢va (Haemmorrhage), Vra ´a (Ulcer) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 1 to 2 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CXLII  M¡¡ ¡¡DHAV ££££ (Flower) 
 
M¢dhav ¤ consists of the dried flowers of Hiptage benghalensis  L. (Fam. Malpighiaceae), a large woody, 
much branched climbing shrub with young parts silky, growing widely, chie fly in damp places, throughout India 
and Andaman Islands, up to an altitude of 1,500 m. 
 
SYNONYMS-  Atimukt ¢, Atimuktaka, M ¢dha ¤lata 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES-  
 
Ben. :   Maadhivilataa 
Eng. :   Clustered Hiptage 
Guj. :   Maadhavi, Ragatpiti 
Hin. :  Maadhavi, Anetaa 
Kan. :  Maadhavivasantadhuti 
Mal. :  Sitaampu 
Mar. :  Madhumaalati, Haladvel 
Ori. :  Boromali 
Pun. :  Benkar 
Tam. :  Maadhavi, Kurukkathi 
Tel. : Maadhavi 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
 Drug consists of a mixture of entire, shrivelled flowers and detac hed floral parts; flower bisexual, regular, 
1.2 to 2.0 cm across, racemes terminal and axillary, pedicellate, pedi cel 1.5 to 2 cm in length; calyx 5, persistent, 
polysepalous, externally densely pubescent, lobes oblong, obtuse, 6 to 9 mm long a nd 3 to mm broad, central 
fleshy and thin near margin with a large oblong basal gland measuri ng 5 to 7 mm in length and 2 to 3 mm in 
breadth; corolla 5, polypetalous, 1.5 to 2 cm broad and 2 to 2.5 cm long, smooth, silk y, orbicular, clawed, fringed 
on the margin; uppermost fragment broader and yellowish; stamens 10 enc ircling the disc, one being larger than 
other nine, anther bilobed, pistil one, consisting of swollen ovary, with thr ee winged like appendages one being 
larger and hairy; carpels 3, syncarpous, style one, longer than stamens, stigma 1, ovule s3. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Powder - Creamish grey, shows fragments of rectangular shaped epidermal  cells of calyx in the surface view along 
with multicellular, uniseriate trichomes, and their detached broken piec es scattered as such; fragments of epidermal 
cells of petals in surface view with stright, polygonal walls and diacytic stomata, abundant spherical pollen grains 
exhibiting 3 to 5 germ pores and distict smooth exine and intine; fragme nts of parenchyma of petals containing 
rosette crystals of calcium oxalate; abundant pitted lignified fi brous sclereids with broad lumen and pointed or 
blunt apex often exhibiting occasional swelling at places, and twisted or bifurcating ends; fibrous layer and 
papillose epidermis of anther.             
 
  CXLIII  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGHT- 
  
Foreign matter  -        Not more than   2   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2  
Total ash   -        Not more than 10   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -        Not more than 0.5  per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractvie -        Not less than   10   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive -        Not less than  30   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7    
 
T.L.C. –  
 
 T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate (0.2 mm using toluene-ethyl acetate  (9:1) shows spots 
at R f. 0.27, 0.43, 0.49 and 0.96 on spraying with vanillin sulphuric acid reagent  and heating the plate for about 10 
minutes at 110 o. 
 
CONSTITUENTS - No report on the chemical consitituents of the flower is available. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa :  Madhura, Ka °u, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a :  Laghu 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka :  Madhura 
Karma :  Trido ¾aha °a, Ku ¾°ª aghna 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS-  Candrakal ¢- rasa, Madhvi, Vasanti Guna, 
Atimukta Guna, M ¢dhv ¤ Taila 
  
THERAPEUTIC USES - Agnim āndya (Digestive impairment), K ¨mi roga (Worm 
infestation), Ka ´² u (Itching), Pama (Eczema), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), Stha ulya 
(Obesity), Tvakroga (Skin diseases) 
 
DOSE-    C¦r´a (Powder):   3 to 6 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CXLIV  MATSYAPATRIK ¡¡ ¡¡ (Whole Plant) 
 
 Matsyapatrik ¢ is the whole plant of  Merremia tridentata  (L.) Hall. f. Syn. Ipomoea  tridentata (L.) Roth. 
(Fam. Convolvulaceae), a prostrate herb occurring widely in the plains throughout India a s a weed. 
  
SYNONYMS -  Pras ¢rin ¤ Keral ¤ya 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Mal.       :    Talaneeli 
Ori.        :    Bhuin Kumdda 
Tam.      :    Mutiyarkunthal, Irippanpul, Savolikkoti 
Tel.        :    Sitasavaram 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
a) Macroscopic:  
 
Root -Yellowish brown, individual pieces tortuous, 2 to 4 mm dia., with a brownish bark and crea my wood; broken 
surface yellowish; fracture fibrous; no odour or taste. 
 
Stem -Yellowish brown and brittle, minutely hairy; internodes 1 to 2 cm in le ngth; fracture fibrous, broken surface 
yellow; pith hollow. 
 
Leaf -Simple, alternate, dull green to brown, rarely brittle; petiole 1 to 2 m m long, minutely hairy; lamina 1 to 5 cm 
long and 0.2 to 0.6 cm broad, linear lanceolate, mucronate, generally glabrous , but base minutely hairy, 3 to 4 
lobed, hastate to lobed-hastate, lobe tips mucronate;  margin entire; veins 5 to 7 pairs, alternate, rarely opposite, 
prominent below. 
 
Flower – Inflorescence  cymose, rarely solitary, axillary, peduncle 1.5 to 3 cm, base hairy, br ownish; pentamerous, 
funnel shaped; about 1.5 cm across, sepals five, stamens five and unequal, style slender, stigma bifid, ovary 
globose, bicarpellate. 
 
Fruit  -Capsule, dry dehiscent, up to 6 mm across, globose, yellowish brown, surface  smooth; seeds 4, angularly 
ovate, 2 to 3 mm. glabrous, dark brown to black in colour.  
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Root - TS shows cork tissue composed of transversely elongated cells; t he cortex consists of 7 to 10 layers of 
tangentially elongated, narrow and thin walled cells containing many, simple, small, rounded starch grains and 
clusters of calcium oxalate crystals; latex present in thin wa lled, brown coloured, circular cells; cortex followed by 
phloem with sieve tubes, companion cells and phloem parenchyma, some of whi ch contain small starch grains; 
xylem continuous as a ring; medullary rays mostly uniseriate and rarely biseri ate. 
 
Stem  -TS shows an outline slightly 4 angled; epidermis a layer of rect angular cells, followed by a cortex of 
polygonal parenchymatous cells with small intercellular spaces; some show yellowish brown latex; cortex followed 
by a layer or two of a broken pericycle of small stone cells; vascular bundles 7 to 8; external phloem continuous 
and wavy; xylem consists of wide vessels and tracheids; internal , perimedullary phloem  not continuous; pith, 
where present, with irregular thin walled polygonal cells having    plenty of star ch grains. 
  CXLV   Leaf - 
 
Midrib -TS shows a depression on the adaxial side; epidermis of rectangular c ells followed by 4 to 6 layers of thick 
walled parenchymtous cells, many of which contain cluster crystals  of calcium oxalate; xylem with 4 to 7 rows of 
xylem vessels arranged in a semicircle; phloem  seen just bel ow the xylem, followed by about 5 layers of 
polygonal parenchyma cells; just above the lower epidermis a singl e layer of chlorenchyma present. The lower 
epidermal cells  broader and thick walled. 
 
Lamina -Upper epidermis followed by 2 to 3 layers of elongated palisade cell s; spongy mesophyll with loosely 
arranged 2 to 3 layers of cells; stomata anomocytic; unicellular and multicellular uniseriate trichomes present at the 
leaf base and at the junction of the petiole, on upper surface only. 
  
Powder - Brown, has no characteristic odour and slightly bitter the microscopic  observation shows compact 
rectangular parenchyma; globular and clustered starch grains of about  5 µm across; granular crystals of calcium 
oxalate; reddish brown resinous masses; irregular colourless masse s; multicellular uniseriate trichomes of about 
180 µm in length; unicellular trichomes of about 40 to 150 µm; long wiry fibres; patches of polygonal epidermal 
parenchyma with anomocytic stomata; spiral vessels; reticulate vesse ls; bordered pitted vessels and tracheids. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -  
 
Foreign matter                - Not more than   2  per cent,    Appendix    2.2.2 
Total ash    - Not more than 10  per cent,    Appendix    2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash   - Not more than   1  per cent,    Appendix    2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than     5  per cent,    Appendix    2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than   14  per cent,    Appendix    2.2.7  
 
T.L.C. - 
 
 T.L.C of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plat e (0.2 mm thick) using n-hexane: 
ethylacetate: methanol  (5:4:1) as mobile phase, after spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and 
heating at 105 o for 5 minutes  shows  spots at   R f. 0.10 (grey), 0.28 (pink), 0.35 (pink), 0.42 (pink), 0.47 (pink), 
0.55 (pink), 0.67 (pink), 0.73 (yellow) and 0.8 (pink). 
  
CONSTITUENTS– Flavonoids like diosmetin, luteolin, diosmetin-7- O-β− glucoside and luteolin -7- O-
β glucoside.  CXLVI   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Tikta, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´a : Guru, Sara 
V¤rya : U ¾´ a 
Vip ¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : V ¢tahara, Ar ºoghna, Bhedana, Sandh ¢n¤ya,  
   Sara, V ¨¾ ya 
 
IMPORTANT  FORMULATIONS -  Pras ¢ran ¤da- taila (keraliya) 
  
THERAPEUTIC USES - Ar śa (Piles), Dh ¢tuk ¾ya (Tissue wasting), Pak ¾¢ gh ¢ta (Paralysis / 
Hemiplegia), Sandhisotha (Arthritis), ¹otha (Inflammation), Vibandha (Constipation), Vra ´a (Ulcer) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 3 to 6 g.  
              Svarasa (Juice) :: 5 to 10 ml.  CXLVII  MED ¡¡ ¡¡ (Rhizome) 
 
Med ¢ is the dried rhizome of Polygonatum cirrhifolium  Royle (Fam. Liliaceae), a stout herb found in 
temperate Himalayas from Shimla eastward to Bhutan and Manipur upto an altitude of 1500 t o 3300 m. 
 
SYNONYMS-  Manichidr ¢, Dhar ¢, Sutr ¢grapatr ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES - 
 
Ass. :  Meda 
Ben. :  Meda 
Guj. :  Meda 
Hin. :  Medaa 
Kan. :  Medhaa 
Mal. :  Meda 
Mar. :  Meda 
Ori. :  Meda 
Pun. :  Meda 
Tel. :  Meda 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
 Rhizome tuberous, branched or show large circular scars where they have broken off, outer surface 
smooth, greyish in colour, longitudinally wrinkled when dried, marked with transverse rings of leaf scars and also 
shows scars of aerial stem on upper side; numerous roots arise from  surface; fracture short, fibrous; odour, 
aromatic, taste, bitter. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Rhizome-  TS shows about 10 layers of cork cells with thick cuticularised out er wall,  followed by ground tissue, 
with numerous scattered vascular bundles; vascular bundles collater al, each associated with a group of fibres, 
usually arc-shaped or occasionally nearly surrounding the bundle; cells of the gr ound tissue small, loosely arranged 
and contain numerous rounded to oval starch grains measuring 8 to 14 µ in diameter and raphides and prismatic 
crystals of calcium oxalate; endodermis not distinct. 
 
Powder - Light brown, taste bitter, starch grains simple, rounded to oval measuring 8 to 14 m in diame ter; variable 
size of prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and raphides; borde r- pitted and reticulately thickened vessels; fibres 
elongated, thick walled, measuring about 550 to 800 µ long and 12 to 26 µ wide, tracheids with lumen width 8 to 
12 µ.. 
 
 
 
 
  CXLVIII  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH– 
 
Foreign matter    - Not more than     2     per cent,  Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash    - Not more than     5     per cent,  Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash   - Not more than     1     per cent,  Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than     25     per cent,  Appendix   2.2.6 
Water–soluble extractive  - Not less than     62     per cent,  Appendix   2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract of the drug on silica gel ‘G’ plate  using chlorofor : glacial acetic 
acid:methanol : water  (50:20:20:10) under UV light 365 nm shows fluorescent zones at R f. 0.54, 0.71 & 0.85 (all 
greenish). On spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and heating the plate for 10 minutes at 105° spots 
appear at R f. 0.44 (bluish), 0.56 (bluish), 0.73 (black), 0.85 (brownish).  
 
CONSTITUENTS - Steroidal saponins (diosgenin), proteins and resins. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Snigdha, Picchila, Guru 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Madhura 
Karma : Balya, B ¨¼ ha ´a, Garbhad ¢, J ¤van ¤ya 
  Kaphavardhaka, Pau ¾°ika, Pittahara, Stanyajanana,V ¨¾ya  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Da ºam ¦l¢ri ¾°a, ¹at ¢var ¤ Taila, Triphal ¢ gh ¨ta, Meda Guna, 
Mahameda, Meda - mahameda Guna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - B¢laroga (Disease of children), Bhagandara (Fistula-in-ano), Gulma (Abdominal 
lump), Kāmal ā (Jaundice), K ¢rºya (Emaciation), K ¢sa (Cough), K ¾aya (Pthisis), Nakt ¢ndhya (Night 
blindness), Netrasr ¢va (Chronic dacrocystitis or epiphora), R ¢jayak ¾m¢ (Tuberculosis) , Raktapitta (Bleeding 
disorder), ¹o¾a (Emaciation), ¹v¢sa (Asthma), Timira (Cataract), Visarpa (Erysepales) 
 
DOSE – C¦r´a (Powder): 3 to 6 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CXLIX  N¡±£¡±£¡±£¡±£HI «« ««GU (Exudate) 
 
 N¢²¤hi ¬gu is the dried resinous exudation from the shoot tip of Gardenia gummifera L. f. Syn. G. arborea 
Roxb. (Fam. Rubiaceae), a large shrub occurring in moist deciduous forests of India. 
 
SYNONYMS-  Hi ¬gun ¢² ik ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. Dikamali 
Eng. Gummy Gardenia 
Guj. Dikaamaari, Maaladi 
Hin. Naadihingu, Dikaamaali 
Kan. Dikkaamalli 
Mal. Somanaadikaayam, Gandharaajan 
Mar Dikemaali 
Pun. Dikaamaali 
Tam. Tikka malli 
Tel. Tellamanga, Karinguva 
Urd. Dikkamali 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
 
 Macroscopic: 
 
           Globular droplets between 1 and 3 mm in size, shiny, smooth and translucent;   sulphur yellow to golden 
yellow in colour, gradually turning brown with age, broken surface shiny and smooth; fracture  brittle when dry but 
sticky when fresh;  has a characteristic smell of asafoetida and tastes slightly bitter.  
  
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter   :     Not more than   2  per cent,    Appendix   2.2.2 
 
Solubility : Insoluble in water and slightly soluble in most of the organic solvent s; dissolves in strong acids, 
turning brown to reddish brown, as it gets charred. 
 
Identification test- 
 
1. 0.1g of the droplets of the gum when treated with 1ml conc. hydrochloric a cid gradually turns brownish. It 
dissolves slightly on keeping and the solution becomes yellow. 
 
2. 0.1g of the droplets of the gum on treatment with 1ml conc. nitric aci d turns red with evolution of 
effervescence. The solution turns reddish brown on keeping and the gum gradually dissolves  in it. 
 
3. 0.1g of the droplets of the gum on treatment with 1ml conc. sulphuric acid gradually dissolves in it turning 
the solution reddish brown.  
 
  CL  T.L.C. - 
 
  T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plat e (0.2 mm thick) using n-
hexane:chloroform:methanol  (4:5:1) as mobile phase, after spraying  with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and 
heating at 105 o for 5 minutes shows spots at R f. 0.2 (deep yellow), 0.22 (yellow), 0.31 (yellow), 0.37 (pale yellow), 
0.43 (light pink), 0.55 (yellow), 0.63 (light pink)  and 0.81 (pale yellow). 
 
CONSTITUENTS- Gardenin, 3 ',4 ',5 ' apigenin,  demethoxysudachitin and 3 ',5 '-dihydoxy-4'-methoxywogonin.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa : Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a : T ¤k¾´ a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : V ¢tahara, Kaphahara, D ¤pana, V ¢t¢nulomaka, P ¢cana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Pipp ¢lyadidh ¦pana K ¨miku °hara Rasa, Nadi Hingu Guna, Vanaspatri 
Arka Gunah, Vaspika Guna  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- ¡dhm āna (Flatulance with gurgling sound), Agnim āndya (Digestive impairment), 
Aj ¤r´a (Indigestion), ¡mado ¾a (Products of impaired digestion and metabolism), Aruci (Tasteles sness), 
Gulma (Abdominal lump), Hikk ¢ (Hiccup), Kr /uniF023mi (Helminthiasis), Medoroga (Obesity), Udara º¦ la (Pain in 
the abdomen) 
  
DOSE -  C ¦r´a (Powder) : 1 to 3 g.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CLI  N¡¡ ¡¡H££££    (Whole Plant) 
 
 N¢h¤ consists of the whole plant of Enicostemma axillare (Lam.) A. Raynal. Syn. E. littorale Blume, E. 
hysoppifolium  (Willd.) Verd. (Fam. Gentianaceae), an erect herb,  50 to 60 cm high, found throughout the 
greater parts of India upto an altitude of 500 metre s, more commonly in coastal areas and damp habitats.  
 
SYNONYMS – M¢majjaka, N ¢gajihv ¢ 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Guj.        :   Maamijvaa, Maamejvaa  
Hin.         :   Naay, Naai, Chhotaa Kiraayataa  
Kan.        :   Karibandit, Sogade  
Mal.        :   Vellaruku, Vellari  
Mar.        :   Kadvi naai  
Pun.        :   Bahuguni  
Tam.        :   Vellaruku  
Tel.        :   Chhevvu-kurti, Gulvidi  
Urd.         :   Naay  
 
DESCRIPTION -  
a) Macroscopic : 
Root -  Root 2 to 4 mm in diameter, taproot dull white in c olour surface slightly rugose; lateral roots not 
abundant; odour not specific; taste, bitter. 
 
Stem -  Provided with many erect or procumbent branches, read ily rooting at nodes, bearing small white flowers 
in whorled axillary clusters; no odour; taste, bitte r. 
 
Leaf -  Leaves opposite, sessile, shape and size very variable,  midrib depressed on adaxial and prominent on 
abaxial side, upto 6 to 7cm long and about 1.25cm, b road, narrow linear or linear oblong, glaucous; odour  nil; 
taste, bitter. 
 
b)  Microscopic: 
Root  - TS shows circular outline; epidermis single layered, with large and smaller cells; trichomes unicellular;  
cortex parenchymatous with large irregular airspaces; endodermis and a few layers of pericycle well defined ; 
stele nearly circular in the central region with scat tered vessels among thick walled parenchyma cells; 
medullary ray uniseriate; pith absent. 
 
Stem  - Stem is quadrangular in outline with narrow wings; ep idermis single layered with barrel shaped cells; 
winged corners show outer collenchyma and inner paren chyma; a cortical zone consisting of circular 
parenchymatous cells with intercellular spaces; endo dermis well developed; vascular bundle bicollateral; xylem 
vessels arranged singly or in radial rows in a circle a long with xylem parenchyma; medullary rays uniseriate; 
pith parenchymatous; starch grains present. 
 
Leaf- 
Midrib  - TS shows prominent bulge abaxially, consisting of col lenchymatous cells; collateral vascular bundle 
present; ground tissue consists of thin walled paren chymatous cells, more loosely packed on the abaxial si de.  
  CLII  Lamina  - Epidermis single layered; papillae occur occasionall y on both the epidermis; walls in surface view 
wavy, more so in the lower epidermis; stomata anisocytic; mes ophyll consists of slightly vertically elongated 
palisade cells below the upper epidermis followed by loosely packe d layers of spongy cells; stomatal number for 
adaxial epidermis 1 to 3/mm 2 and for abaxial epidermis 2 to 4/mm 2; stomatal index for adaxial epidermis 18 to 
22, and for abaxial epidermis 20 to 24; palisade ra tio 20 to 22; vein islet number 12 to 14 and veinle t 
termination number 7 or 8. 
 
Powder - Greenish, epidermal fragments with anisocytic sto mata; ray cells present; vessel elements, and 
starch grains upto 5 µ in size present; fibres with wide lumen also seen.   
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -  
Foreign matter - Not more than 1 per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash -  Not more than 9 per cent,  Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash -  Not more than 3 per cent, Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  -    Not less than 16 per cent, Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than 28 per cent,  Appendix 2.2.7 
Fixed oil -  Not less than  5 per cent, Appendix 2.2.8 
T.L.C. – 
T.L.C. of chloroform extract on aluminium plate pre coated with silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  (0.2 mm thickness) 
using toluene: ethyl acetate 6:1 + 6 drops of formic acid, under UV 254 nm shows spots at R f. 0.27, 0.30, 0.40,0.51, 
0.54, 0.62 and 0.70 (all green). Under UV 366 nm flu orescent zones shows at R f. 0.22, 0.27 (both white), 0.34 
(pink), 0.38 (violet), 0.40, 0.51 (both magenta), 0.58 (blue), 0.62 ( dark magenta), 0.66 (magenta) 0.70 (navy 
blue) are seen. On exposure to iodine vapours,  spots are observed at R f. 0.18, 0.25, 0.32 (all yellowish brown), 0.40, 
0.47, 0.51 (all green), 0.58 (yellowish brown), 0.6 4 (green), 0.72, 0.80, and 0.94  (all yellowish bro wn). On dipping the 
plate in vanillin - sulphuric acid reagent  and heating at 105° for 5 minutes, spots appear at R f. 0.22 (blue), 0.27 (pink), 
0.34 (violet), 0.44 (green), 0.51, 0.58 (both viole t), 0.62 (green), 0.68, 0.76, 0.80 (all violet), 0. 86 (blue) and 0.94 (violet).  
 
CONSTITUENTS – Genkwanin, apigenin, isovitexin, swertisin, saponarin, s wertiamarin, betulin, enicoflavin, 
gentiocrucine, gentianine, erythrocentaurine, ephelic  acid glycoside, sylswertisioside, isoswertisin-5- O-
glucoside; sylswertisin-5- O-glucoside. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
Rasa  :  Tikta 
Guna  :  Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya  :  U ¾¬ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka  :  Ka °u 
Karma  :  V ¢t¢nulomaka, Pittahara, Kaphahara, D ¤pana, P ¢cana, Vi ¾aghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- V¢yucchaya Surendra Taila  
THERAPEUTIC USES- K¨mi (Worm infestation), ¹otha (Oedema), Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus), Medoroga 
(Obesity), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Raktav ¤k¢ra (Disorders of blood), Tvak roga (Skin diseases), 
Vi ¾amajvara (Intermittent fever), Vibandha (Constipation), Yakrtdaurbalya (P oor function of liver) 
DOSE- C¦r´a ( Powder): 1 to 3 g.   CLIII  NIKOCAKA (Kernel) 
 
 Nikocaka consists of kernels of Pinus gerardiana Wall. (Fam. Coniferae), a medium sized tree growing in 
North-Western Himalayan region between 5,800 to 12,000 feet. It is  remov ed from the pine nut known as 
Chilgoza in trade. 
 
SYNONYMS – Cilagoja 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
  
Eng. : Chilgoza pine, Edible pine, Neosa pine 
Guj. : Chilgojhaa 
Hin. : Chilgozaa, Neoza, Gunobar, Rhee 
Kan. : Chilgojha 
Mal. : Chilgojha 
Mar. : Chilgoza, Galgoja 
Ori. : Chilgojha 
Pun. : Mirrigalgoj, Mirri, Chiri, Chirrigalgoja 
Tel. : Chilgoja 
Urd. : Chilgozah 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic:  
 
Off-white in colour; oval in shape and pointed at the micropylar end; r anging from 1.5 to 2 cm long; 
oleaginous; possess a delicate terebinthine flavour; odour sweet. 
 
b) Microscopic:  
 
Diagrammatic TS is circular in outline shows epidermis covere d with cuticle followed by wide ground 
tissue; collapsed layer; inner parenchymatous region which has 8 to 10 vascular bundl es arranged in a ring, cells of 
the ground tissue are filled with starch grains and oil globules; v ascular bundles consist of a centrally located 
xylem encircled by a phloem, with an external bundle sheath. 
 
Powder - Yellowish white, polygonal, thin walled, barrel shaped epidermis in surf ace view; abundant simple, 
spherical starch grains scattered as such and in parenchyma cells of ground tissue ; fragments of xylem vessels. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter               :  Not more than   2       per cent,    Appendix    2.2.2 
Total ash   : Not more than   3       per cent,    Appendix    2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  :  Not more than   0.2    per cent,    Appendix    2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive :   Not less than     28     per cent,    Appendix    2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  : Not less than     18     per cent,    Appendix    2.2.7 
Fixed oil    :  Not less than     43     per cent,    Appendix    2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. -   CLIV   
Take 2 g of the powdered drug and extract with n-hexane (2 x 25 ml), by refluxing on a water bath. Filter 
and concentrate the pooled extract. Adjust the volume to 10 ml with ethanol  and apply about 20 µl on precoated 
silica gel 60 F 254  plate (thickness 0.2 mm). 
 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ 60 plate  using petroleum ether: diethyl ether: 
acetic acid  (9:1:0.1), after spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and heating at 105 o for 5 minutes 
shows spots at R f 0.10 (purple), 0.14 (purple), 0.18 (purple), 0.22 (purple), 0.37 (dark purple) and 0.87 (light 
purple). 
 
CONSTITUENTS –  Palmitic, stearic, oleic and linoleic acids; palmito-dilinolein, stearo-dilinolein, palmito-
oleolinolein, stearo-oleolinolein, trilinolein, oleodilinolein, dioleolinolein and triolei n. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Snigdha, Guru 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Madhura 
Karma 
 : ¹le ¾ma-ni ªs¢raka, B ¨¼ ha ´a, Balya, Dh ¢tuvardhana, Kaphakara,   
  Pittakara, Raktapras ¢daka, Uttejaka, V ¨¾ya, V ¢tahara  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - J¤van ¤ya Gh ¨ta, Nikocaka Guna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- ¡mav ¢ta (Rheumatism), Apasm ¢ra (Epilepsy), Ardita (Facial palsy), Hikk ¢ 
(Hiccup), K ¢sa (Cough), K ¾ata (Wound), K ¾aya (Pthisis), Ka °iº¦la (Lower backache), P ¢´ ²u (Anaemia), 
P¢rºva º¦la (Intercostal neuralgia and pleurodynia), Pak ¾avadha (Paralysis / Hemiplegia), Sandhiv ¢ta 
(Arthritis due to Vata dosa), ¹v¢sa (Asthma), V ¢tarakta (Gout) 
 
DOSE – C¦r´a ( Powder): 10 to 20 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CLV  PANASA (Root Bark) 
 
Panasa consists of dried root bark of Artocarpus heterophyllus  Lamk. Syn. A. integrifolia  
L.f.(Fam. Moraceae), a medium to large evergreen tree common in W estern Ghats and cultivated 
throughout India for its fruits. 
 
SYNONYMS –  M¦laphalada, Apu ¾paphalada, Atib ¨hatphala 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
Ass. : Kanthal 
Ben. : Katal, Kantal, Kathal, Phanas 
Eng. : Jack-fruit tree, Indian Jack fruit 
Guj. : Phanus 
Hin. : Kathar, Kathal, Katahala 
Kan. : Hebba alasu 
Mal. : Chakka 
Mar. : Phanasa 
Ori. : Panasa, Ponoso 
Pun. : Katahala 
Tam. : Pala 
Tel. : Panasa 
Urd. : Katahal 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
a) Macroscopic: 
  Bark upto 5 to 8 cm long, 2 to 4.5 cm wide and 4 to 12 mm thick, greyish to reddish brown with 
longitudinal ridges and circular to tangentially elongated lenticel s; fracture, short, showing creamish interior; odour 
taste and indistinct.  
b) Microscopic: 
Bark shows cork consisting of rectangular and tangentially elongat ed cells;  phellogen 1 to 2 layered; 
phelloderm shows thin walled parenchyma cells, groups of stone cells and fibres present in lower phelloderm 
region; phloem a wide zone consisting of sieve tubes, companion cells, phl oem parenchyma, fibres and stone cells 
being traversed by multiseriate medullary rays; stone cells and fibres in groups of varying dimensions scattered 
throughout the phloem region;  the stone cells are upto 70 µ long and upto 30 µ wide and fibre measuring about 
1450 µ  in length ; a large number of prismatic and rhomboidal crystals of calcium oxalate s cattered in parenchyma 
cells of phloem and phelloderm. 
Powder - Shows rectangular to polygonal stone cells with wide lumen and simple  pits, fragments of fibres with 
tapering ends, thin walled parenchyma cells with prismatic and rhomboi dal crystals of calcium oxalate, fragments 
of cork cells and numerous scattered rhomboidal and prismatic crystals of calcium  oxalate. 
 
 
  CLVI  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter                        -         Not more than     2   per cent,  Appendix    2.2.2  
Total ash                                  -         Not more than   19   per cent,  Appendix    2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash                  -         Not more than   10   per cent,  Appendix    2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive     -         Not less than       7   per cent,  Appendix    2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive       -         Not less than       3   per cent,  Appendix    2.2.7  
T.L.C. – 
 T.L.C. alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate using toluene: chloroform: ethyl acetate  (2:2:1), 
on spraying with ethanolic sulphuric acid  and heating the plate at 105 o for 10 minutes shows spots at R f. 0.30, 
0.36, 0.43, (all light green), 0.52 (purple), 0.67 (green) and   0.87 (purple).   
CONSTITUENTS -  β-sitosterol, cycloartenone, cycloartenol; tannins. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Ka ¾¢ ya, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Gr ¢h¤, Pittahara, Stambhana, Tvakdo ¾ahara, V ¢tavardhaka,   
  Vi ¾°ambhak ¢raka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Panasa Guna, Apakva Panasa Guna, Panasa, Panasa bija Guna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), D ¢ha (Burning sensation), Rakta-pitta (Bleeding disorder), 
¹otha (Inflammation), Tvak roga (Skin diseases) 
 
DOSE – C¦r´a ( Powder):  3 to 6 g.  CLVII  P¡¡ ¡¡PA ¯¯ ¯¯A©© ©© (Root)  
 
P¢pa °aª consists of the root pieces of Pavetta indica  var. tomentosa  Hook. Syn.  P. tomentosa Roxb.  (Fam. 
Rubiaceae), a stout bushy shrub, reaching about 9 m. high, occurring throughout the  deciduous forests of India, as 
an under growth.    
 
SYNONYMS  – P ¢pa ²¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass. : Gobor sitha 
Ben. : Kukurchuda, Jui 
Eng. : White Pavetta 
Guj. : Papat 
Hin. : Kankra, Papari, Kathachmpa 
Kan. : Pavati, Pappadi, Paavatlegida 
Mal. : Pavatta 
Mar. : Papadi, Kakra 
Ori. : Katha pengu 
Pun. : Papadi 
Tam. : Pavattai 
Tel. : Konda papata, Duyi papata, Papata kammi 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
a) Macroscopic : 
 
Root pieces measuring 4 to 12 cm long and 1 to 3 cm in thickness, outer s urface smooth, light brown; 
fracture entire, fractured surface smooth with very thin, dark brow n easily detachable bark and a central light 
yellowish, tough, wood; odour and taste indistinct. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
TS of the mature root shows a thin, stratified bark and an extensive  wood; bark composed of cork, 3 to 8 
layers of thick walled isodiametric, compactly arranged cells  interrupted by lenticels; cork cambium uniseriate, 
cells tangentially elongated-thin walled; cortex, parenchymatous, c ells isodiametric, compactly arranged; 
secondary phloem with sieve tubes, abundant phloem parenchyma and thick wal led lignified phloem fibres, 
solitary or in groups, wood hard, close grained, pores very small, vess els numerous, arranged singly in radial rows; 
with circular bordered pits arranged alternately in vertical r ows; xylem parenchyma thick walled, filled with 
rhomboid crystals of calcium oxalate; xylem fibres abundant, polygonal w ith thick lignified pitted walls, 
surrounding the xylem vessels, lumen very narrow; medullary rays short, numerous, fine  to very fine. 
 
Powder - Brownish-grey, patches of cork tissue with stratified cells, ve ssels with bordered pits, phloem and xylem 
fibres, ray cell fragments in tangential view and rhomboid calcium oxalate cry stals. 
  CLVIII  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGH  - 
 
Foreign matter       -   Not more than   2   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash      -     Not more than   3   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash      -     Not more than   1   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive         -     Not less than     5   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive           -     Not less than     9   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. - 
 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate using n-hexane: ethyl acetate  (8:2) under UV 366 nm  
shows fluorescent spots at R f. 0.5, 0.64, 0.93 and 0.97 (all blue) on exposure to iodine vapour   spots appear at R f. 
values 0.15, 0.28, 0.50, 0.64, 0.93 and 0.97 (yellow), on spraying with 5% methanolic sulphuric acid reagent  and 
heating the plate for 10 minutes at 105 °  shows  spots  at  R f. values 0.15, 0.46, 0.64, 0.75, 0.93 and 0.97. 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Fixed oil.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa : Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Balya, Kaphaghna, M ¦trala, Var ´ya, Virecana 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug 
  
THERAPEUTIC USES- Kāmal ā (Jaundice), Ka ´² ¦ (Itching), M ¦traroga (Urinary diseases), 
¹otha (Inflammation), Udararoga (Diseases of abdomen), Vibandha (Constipa tion), Vispho °a 
(Blister) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 3 to 6 g 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CLIX  PAR ³³ ³³AYAV ¡¡ ¡¡N££££ (Leaf) 
 
 Par ´ayav ¢n¤ consists of the leaves of Coleus amboinicus Lour. Syn. C. aromaticus Benth. (Fam. 
Lamiaceae), an aromatic, succulent perennial herb commonly cultivat ed in gardens throughout India and found wild 
in Rajasthan. 
 
SYNONYMS –  Yav ¢n¤gandh ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. :  Paatharchur, Paterchur 
Eng. :  Country borage, Indian borage 
Guj. :  Ovaapaan 
Hin. :  Pattaajvaayana 
Kan. :  Karpurahalli, Penova 
Mal. :  Kannikurukka, Panikkurukka, Navarayilla 
Mar. :  Paan, Ovaa 
Ori. :  Hemakedara, Amarpoi 
Pun. :  Patharchura 
Tam. :  Karpuravalli 
Tel. :  Kapparillaku, Vamu-aku 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a)  Macroscopic: 
 
Leaf - Leaves green, opposite, hispidly villous, broadly o vate, crenate, succulent, upto 9 cm in width, 
petiolate, nerves impressed, odour, pleasantly arom atic; taste, pungent. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Petiole - TS shows a  slightly  concave  outline on the  adaxial   side and  convex on the  abaxial  side,  
epidermis  a  single  layer  of  laterally  elongat ed   cells, followed by collenchyma of 2 or 3 layers; 
vascular bundles collateral, four in number of which  two lateral abaxial bundles are larger and two late ral 
adaxial are smaller; ground tissue of thin walled p arenchymatous cells; glandular trichomes; unicellul ar, and 
non-glandular uniseriate multicellular. 
 
Midrib - TS shows a hemi- spherical protrusion on the abaxia l side and has a light depression on the adaxial 
side; 2 or 3 layers of collenchyma situated just ab ove the abaxial epidermis and below the adaxial epi dermis; 
palisade layer continuous over the midrib also; gro und tissue consists of parenchyma cells; a solitary  
vascular bundle present in the centre. 
Lamina -Dorsiventral, adaxial and abaxial epidermis compos ed of rectanglular cells, the abaxial cells 
being distinctly smaller; stomata diacytic, lie flu sh with the epidermal surface; subjacent to adaxial epider mis 
three, or occasionally even more, layers of slightly vertic ally elongated, columnar, closely arranged palisade cells 
are seen; following the palisade 4 or 5 layered spongy tissue composed of nearly rounded closely arranged 
cells with intercellular spaces seen; trichomes gland ular and non-glandular; uniseriate, non-glandular  CLX  trichomes 3 to 6 celled, curved and progressively taper ing; glandular provided with a two celled stalk of which 
the lower cell is the longer and the second that subtends the globular unicellular head nearly discoid; exhausted 
glandular hairs smaller in size also seen; stomatal num ber 12 to 14 / mm 2 for adaxial epidermis and 16 to 
24 / mm 2 for abaxial epidermis; stomatal index for adaxial epidermis is 11 to 14 and for abaxial epidermis 18 to 
22; palisade ratio 2 or 3; vein islet number 10 to 1 3 and vein termination number 2 or 3. 
 
Powder –Green, bitter to taste and characteristic odour; s hows epidermal cells in surface view, with 
slightly wavy walls; diacytic stomata; both uniseri ate as well as glandular trichomes; broad and narro w 
vessel elements also seen, collapsed trichomes seen  in the surface view of epidermis. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter  - Not more than    2   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash - Not more than 16     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  - Not more than   2   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than     7   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than    23   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7 
Fixed oil - Not less than   2.8    per cent,   Appendix   2.2.8  
 
T.L.C – 
 
 T.L.C. of chloroform extract on precoated aluminiu m silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  plate 0.2 mm  thickness 
using toluene : ethyl acetate  (6:1) under UV 366 nm shows fluorescent spots at R f. 0.10 (pink), 0.14 (pink), 0.64 
(pink), 0.73 (dark pink), 0.80 (dark pink). Under U V 254 nm spots appear at R f. 0.14, 0.27, 0.33, 0.64, 0.73, 
0.80 (all green) and then dipping the plate in vanillin -sulphuric acid  and heating at 105 o for 5 minutes shows 
spots at R f. 0.14, 0.27, 0.33, 0.64, 0.73, 0.80 (all grey).  
 
CONSTITUENTS -Oleanolic acid; crategolic acid; pomolic acid; euscaphic ac id; tormentic acid; ursolic acid 
and 2 α,3 α,19 α,23-oxalacetic acid; cirsimaritin; sitosterol glucos ide; salvingenin; quercetin; 6-
methoxygenkwanin; chrysoeriol;ethyl salicylate; γ-terpinene; β-salinene; luteolin; apigenin; eriodyctol; 
þ-cymene; α and β-pinene; taxifolin; thymol; carvacrol; myrcene, 1,8- cineole; eugenol; β-caryophyllene. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CLXI  PATRASNUH £ (Latex ) 
  Patrasnuh £ consists of the fresh or dried latex of Euphorbia nivulia  Buch.-Ham. (Fam. Euphorbiaceae), a 
spiny spurge growing upto 10m high, found in the dry and rocky regions practic ally throughout India and is often 
grown in hedges. Latex is collected by draining it from freshly cut leaves and ste ms. 
 
SYNONYMS –  Bahuka ´°aka, Vajr ¤, Patta  Karie, Sehu ´² a 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. :  Dandaa thohara, Sij 
Guj. :  Thorkantalo, Thor 
Hin. :  Katthohar, Sij 
Kan. :  Yela kalli 
Mal. :  Ilakalli 
Mar. :  Sabar, Tepari 
Ori. :  Kath sigu 
Tam. :  IIaikkalli 
Tel. :  Akujemudu 
Urd. :  Zakum 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
Fresh –Milky white liquid, bitter taste, distinct and unpleasant odour. 
 
Dry  –Brown in colour, lumpy, malleable to brittle with a dusty surface, bitter to taste and odour  indistinct. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Fresh –A small portion of latex mounted in glycerin shows starch grains, ova l or dumb-bell shaped with 3 lobed 
extremities; a few occur in clusters of 20 to 50 µ in diameter; oval shaped individual starch grains measure 5 to10 µ 
oil globules also seen stained in Sudan III, no associated vegetable debris found.   
 
Dry  -A small portion of residue after softening over water bath and cle aring with 5 % KOH  and  mounted in 
glycerin, shows oval shaped starch grains 5 to 10 µ in diameter, dumbbel l shaped starch grains with 3 lobed 
extremities and grains occurring in clusters 30 to 40 µ in diameter; oil globules als o seen. 
 
Solubility –   
 
Fresh latex soluble in Alcohol, 1N NaOH (aq) and 50 % H 2SO 4 
Dry latex insoluble in Alcohol and  1N NaOH (aq);  partially soluble in 50 %  H2SO 4 
Fluorescence Analysis in Both Day and UV (254 nm) light – 
Fresh latex in 1N NaOH (aq) cream in daylight and light green in UV light. 
Dry latex in 1N NaOH (aq) yellow in day light and light green in UV light. 
 
  CLXII  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
 
Foreign matter    -  Not more than     2        per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash       -  Not more than     2        per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash     -  Not more than   0.12     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive    -  Not less than     29        per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive    -  Not less than       7        per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7 
Fixed oil       -  Not less than     21        per cent,   Appendix   2.2.8    
T.L.C – 
 
 T.L.C of dichloromethane extract on aluminium plate precoated with sili ca gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  (0.2 mm 
thickness) using toluene: ethyl acetate  (6:0.5) under UV 254 nm shows spots at R f. 0.17, 0.20, 0.39, 0.44, 0.63, 
0.71 and 0.80 (all green). On exposure to iodine vapours  spots appear at R f. 0.17, 0.22, 0.32, 0.44 and 0.80 (all 
brown). On  dipping the plate in vanillin-sulphuric acid reagent  and heating at 105º for 5 minutes, spots appear at 
Rf  0.16 (blue),  0.22, 0.26 (both violet), 0.32 (blue), 0.39, 0.44 (both violet), 0.56, 0.64 (both blue) and 0.82 
(violet). 
 
CONSTITUENTS- Cyclonivuliaol; cycloartenol; cycloeucalenol; cycloart-25-en-3- β- 
24-diol. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa :  Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a :  Laghu, T ¤k¾´a, Snigdha 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka :  Ka °u 
Karma                  :  Bhedana, D ¢haka, Lekhana, Virecana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS –  Used as single drug  
THERAPEUTIC USES- Ar ºa (Piles), Bhagandara (Fistula-in-ano), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy/ diseases of skin), 
¹v¢sa (Asthma), Udararoga (Diseases of abdomen) 
  
DOSE  - K ¾¤ra (Latex): 125 to 250 mg. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CLXIII  PI ³± ³± ³± ³± ATAGARA (Rhizome)  
 
            P i´² atagara consists of the dried rhizomes of Asarum europaeum L. (Fam. Aristolochiaceae), an evergreen 
plant with glossy foliage, occurring in Europe and temperate Mediter ranean regions. The rhizomes are imported 
into India. 
 
SYNONYMS -  Dv ¤p¢ntara Tagara, Ka °upatra, P ¢rasika tagara 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
a)  Macroscopic : 
 
             Rhizomes are available in the form of pieces of about 2 to 4 cm long  and 0.7 to 1.5 cm in thickness, 
irregular in shape, hard, external appearance dark brown and warty due t o scars of leaf bases, inflorescences and 
lateral branches; cut surface is slightly coarse, dark coloured with a layer  of thin bark, and a ring of vascular tissue; 
odour characteristically aromatic; taste, indistinct. 
 
b)  Microscopic : 
 
            Irregular in outline, bark contains cork, cork cambium, secondary corte x and phloem;  cork 3 to 6 seriate, 
composed of tangentially elongated, rectangular, compactly arranged, s tratified, thick walled, suberised cells; cork 
cambium uni or biseriate, composed of rectangular, compactly arranged, thin walled cells; secondary cortex 
composed of tangentially elongated thin walled, loosely arranged cells containing t annin as shown by a dark brown 
colour upon treatment with a mixture of freshly prepared 5% w/v Ferr ic Chloride solutions in 90% alcohol and 
25% Basic Lead Acetate solution in carbondioxide free water; endodermi s and pericycle crushed; endodermis 
single layer, cells   barrel shaped, compactly arranged, radial and tangenti al walls are thickened and turn  reddish in 
phloroglucinol and also in Sudan III; pericycle 2 or 3 seriate, composed of  compactly arranged isodiametric cells; 
secondary phloem has sieve tubes, companion cells, extensive phloem parenc hyma and phloem fibres; sieve tubes  
short with thin walls, and simple sieve plates, one or two companion ce lls are associated with each sieve tube; 
phloem parenchymatous cells are elongated tangentially, often collaps ed completely in some places leaving large 
spaces; cells store tannin and oil globules,  xylem is smaller, w ith 12 to 20 in patches, arranged in the form of a 
ring, each patch containing vessels, parenchyma and fibres;   vesse ls  upto 80 µ in width and upto 250 µ in length, 
with oblique end walls and a simple perforation plate; protoxylem elem ents possess spiral thickenings and 
metaxylem vessels have bordered pits arranged alternately;  xy lem fibres scanty, upto 450 µ in length, lignified 
with thick walls; pith crushed. 
Powder - Dark brown in colour, oily, fine, not free flowing, and forms clumps; shows  the presence of cork tissue, 
parenchyma, fibres and xylem vessels; xylem fibres 225 to 350 µ in length, thick walled with simple pits; vessels 
180 to 250 µ long, having spiral thickenings; pitted, wide and short vessels are  also present; end walls, oblique with 
simple perforation plates  
 Eng.              : Common Asarbacca, Foal foot  
Hin. 
Mar. 
Ori. : Tagar ganthoda, Asaarun, Upana 
: Gathi tagara 
: Rukuna, Hatapochha 
Tel. : Chepututaku 
Urd. : Asaarun, Asaroon  CLXIV  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -  
 
Foreign matter  -     Not more than     2    per cent,   Appendix    2.2.2 
Total ash  -     Not more than     6    per cent,   Appendix    2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -     Not more than     2    per cent,   Appendix    2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive value  -     Not less than     20    per cent,   Appendix    2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive value  -     Not less than     25    per cent,   Appendix    2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. -  
              T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on silicagel ‘G’ plate using n-hexane:ethyl acetate  (9:1) under UV 366 nm 
shows fluorescent spots (blue)  R f.  0.20 and 0.37; on exposure to iodine vapour  spots appear at R f. 0.20, 0.37 and 
0.55 (all yellow); on spraying with 5% methanolic sulphuric acid reagent  and heating the plate for 10 minutes at 
105 °  spots appear at R f. values 0.20, 0.37, 0.45, 0.55 and 0.61. 
 
CONSTITUENTS- α-Agrofuran, chalcone diglycoside, α-asarone, diasarone-1,diasarone-2, trans & cis -
isoasarones, fixed oil and volatile oil . 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -  
Rasa : Ka °u, Amla, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma 
 : Kaphara, N ¢²¤balya, ¹irovirecana, ¹vayathuvilayana, Svedajanana,   
  T ¤k¾´avirecana, V ¢maka, Vi ¾aghna 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- ¡mav ¢ta (Rheumatism), An ¢rtava, Apa ºm¢ra (Epilepsy), Ardita 
(Facial palsy), Avarodhajanya K āmal ā (Obstructive jaundice), G ¨dhrasi (Sciatica), Jalodara 
(Ascites), M ¦tr ¢varodha (Uninary obstraction), Netraroga (Diseases of the eye), P ak ¾avadha 
(Paralysis / Hemiplegia), P ¢rºva º¦la (Intercostal neuralgia and pleurodynia), Pl ¤h¢ (Splenic 
disease), Śūla (Pain / Colic), Yak ¨ta ºotha(Hepetitis)   
DOSE – C¦r´a (Powder) : 1 to 3 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CLXV  P££££TA -- --K¡¡ ¡¡¿¿ ¿¿CAN ¡¡ ¡¡RA     (Bud) 
P¤ta-k¢® can ¢ra  consists of dried, mature flower buds of Bauhinia racemosa  Lamk. (Fam. Caesalpiniaceae), 
a small bushy and crooked, deciduous tree distributed throughout India, common in sub-Himalayan tract from the 
Ravi eastwards to Bengal, Central and South India. 
SYNONYMS-  P¤tapu ¾paka ª 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
Ben. :   Bauraj, Sada Kanchana 
Guj. :   Aasotaro, Asundro, Apta 
Hin. :   Asanta, Ashta 
Kan. :   Banne, Kadu manthara 
Mal. :   Mandarum 
Mar. :   Aapataa, Ashtaa 
Ori. :   Kanchana 
Pun. :   Kosundra, Taur 
Tel. :   Ari, Are, Pacchare 
Urd. :   Kachnal 
DESCRIPTION - 
a) Macroscopic: 
  Flower buds 1.5 cm to 2.5 cm in length and 3 to 7 mm in diameter, apex acut e, base tapering with 
attached pedicel measuring up to 2 cm in length, surface light brown t o greyish brown with longitudinal fine 
wrinkles; fragile; calyx limb spathaceous, 5 toothed, reflexed; peta ls oblanceolate, as long as calyx limb; stamens 
10, all perfect; odour and taste indistinct. 
b) Microscopic: 
Calyx-  TS of  sepal more or less circular in outline with 5 to 6 ridges and a ce ntral hollow core; epidermis on both 
surfaces with anomocytic stomata, 1 to 3 celled small covering t richomes, measuring upto 150 µ in length, present 
on lower surface: 4 to 5 layers of collenchyma cells present below  each ridges of lower epidermis; mesophyll 
represented by aerenchyma; numerous vascular bundles arranged in a row  in the mesophyll, vascular bundles 
below each ridge being larger in comparison to others; rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals present in some of the 
cells of aerenchyma.  
Corolla-  Petal shows single layered epidermis followed by mesophyll composed of circular to oval parenchyma 
cells; a number of small vascular bundles present in a row in the mesophyll; most of the parenchyma cells 
adjoining vascular bundles contain yellow to yellowish orange pigments.  
Powder- Powder shows fragments of epidermis of petal with straight wall s, epidermis of sepal with anomocytic 
stomata and 1 to 3 celled covering trichomes, some cells of mesophyl l containing rosettes of calcium oxalate 
crystals, scalariform and spiral vessels with adjoining parenchy ma cells containing pigments ; covering trichomes, 
isolated rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals ; pollen grains circular with smooth exine and entine measuring upto 
100 µ in diameter and thick walled parenchymatous antheridial cells with adjoining sca lariform vascular elements. 
 
  CLXVI  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -  
Foreign matter  - Not more than     2    percent,   Appendix   2.2.2  
Total ash  - Not more than     6    percent,   Appendix   2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash  -  Not more than     1    percent,   Appendix   2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive  -  Not less than     16    percent,   Appendix   2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than     28    percent,   Appendix   2.2.7  
T.L.C.- 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate using toluene: chloroform: ethyl acetate  (2:2:0.5 under 
UV 254 nm shows spots at R f. 0.37, 0.54, 0.60 and 0.77 (all white), 0.40, 0.65 and 0.84 (all pink). 
CONSTITUENTS - Quercetin, isoquercetin.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
Rasa Madhura, Ka ¾¢ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a Snigdha, Guru 
V¤¤¤¤rya ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka Madhura 
Karma Pittakapha º¢maka, Sa ¬gr ¢h¤, Kaphav ¢tahara, Pittahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Asmantaka Guna  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Bh ¦tavik ¢ra (Psychotic syndrome), D ¢ha (Burning sensation), 
Galaga ´² a (Goitre), Ga ´² am ¢l¢ (Cervical lymphadenitis), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), 
Raktavik ¢ra (Disorders of blood), T ¨¾´¢ (Thirst), Vid ¢ha (Burning sensation), Vi ¾amjvara 
(Intermitten fever)  
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 1 to 3 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CLXVII  RAKTA CITRAKA (Root) 
 
                Rakta Citraka consists of the dried roots of Plumbago indica  L. Syn. P. rosea L. Fam. Plumbaginaceae).  
The plant is a perennial undershrub, with alternate entire leaves.  F lowers are rose coloured in terminal spikes with 
gland dotted calyx and fruit  a single seeded pyxidium; occurs all over India, c ultivated or as an escape; roots of the 
plant are harvested at maturity and are dried in shade. 
 
SYNONYMS –  Analan ¢m¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIP 
TION - 
 
a)  Macroscopic: 
 
          The roots are available in the form of thin slices and small pie ces, slices 0.7 to1.2 cm in diameter and the 
pieces 0.2 to 0.5 cm thick 2 or 3 cm long, surface dark brown, vertically fissured, mark ed by transversely elongated 
lenticels, fracture entire, surface smooth with wide light coloure d bark, and a narrow, light yellow hard central 
wood; odour, indistinct; taste, sweetish. 
 
b)  Microscopic:  
 
            TS shows peripheral bark and central wood,  bark 1.0 to 2.0 mm in thickness  and consists of cork, cork 
cambium, secondary cortex and secondary phloem, cork 8 to 10 seriate, compose d of tangentially elongated, 
rectangular, compactly arranged, stratified cells with suberise d walls the cells are filled with tannins, cork is 
interrupted by lenticels; cork cambium  uniseriate, composed of tang entially elongated, barrel shaped, thin walled 
cells;  secondary cortex  scanty,  containing tannins and starch gra ins;  secondary phloem consists of  usual 
elements and fibres, xylem consists of vessels, tracheids, fibres  and parenchyma; vessels of various sizes arranged 
characteristically in uniseriate radiating rows with reticulate t hickenings; xylem fibres 400 to 600 µ  long and 20 to 
30 µ wide.  . 
 
Powder - Yellowish brown, powder consists of cork cells, secondary cortex cells  with tannins, sieve tubes, fibres 
and xylem vessels with reticulate and pitted thickenings. Ass. :  Ranga  agyachit 
Ben. :  Rakto chita, Lal chitra 
Eng. :  Lead wort, Rosy flowered lead wort 
Guj. :  Lal-chitrak, Rato-chatro 
Hin. :  Lal-chita, Rakta-chita 
Kan. :  Kempacitramulam, Kempu chitramula 
Mal. :  Chuvannakkoduveli 
Mar. :  Lal chitrak 
Ori. :  Rangachitaparu 
Tam. :  Kotivel, Cenkotivel  
Tel. :  Errachitramulam 
Urd. :  Cheetaa  CLXVIII  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
 
Foreign matter  - Not more than     2     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash    - Not more than   12     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash   - Not more than     1     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive   - Not less than       5     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than     10     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. - 
 
           T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate using n-hexane: ethyl acetate  (9:1) under UV 366 nm 
shows fluorescent spots at R f. 0.35, 0.53, 0.82 and 0.96. On spraying with Dragendorff’s reagent , spots appear at 
Rf.  0.53, 0.82 and 0.96. On spraying with 5% methanolic sulphuric acid reagent  and heating the plate at 105 o for 
10 minutes, spots appear at R f. 0.35, 0.53, 0.82 and 0.96. 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Quinones and naphthaquinones such as .isoshinanolone, plumbagic acid vahillic acid and 
zeylanone. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa :  Ka °u, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a :  Laghu, R ¦k¾a, T ¤k¾´a 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka :  Ka °u 
Karma :  D ¤pana, Gr ¢h¤, P ¢cana, Ras ¢yana, Rucya 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATION – Citrakagu ´aª 
  
THERAPEUTIC USES- Ar ºa (Piles), Graha ´¤ (Malabsorption syndrome), K ¢sa (Cough), Kr /uniF023mi 
(Helminthiasis), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of skin), P ¢´² u (Anaemia), Sikat ¢meha (Lithuria), ¹otha 
(Oedema), ¹¦ la (Pain) 
  
DOSE - C ¦r´a (Powder): 0.5 to  2 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CLXIX  ROHITAKA (Stem Bark) 
Rohitaka consists of dried stem barks of Tecomella undulata  (Sm.) Seem. (Fam. Bignoniaceae ), a small 
tree distributed in the drier parts of the North-West and Western India, ascending to an altitude of 1,200 m in the 
outer Himalayas and often cultivated in  gardens for its beautiful flowers. 
 
SYNONYMS-  D¢² ima pu ¾pa, D ¢² imacchada 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTI 
ON - 
a) Macroscopic: 
Bark in curved pieces, measuring 5 to 8 mm in thickness; outer surf ace greyish brown with longitudinal 
furrows, transverse irregular cracks and vertically elongate d lenticels; inner surface smooth, buff to light brown; 
fracture tough; fractured surface horny; taste and odour indistinct. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
Bark shows wide cork consisting of rectangular and tangentially e longated cells, rhytidoma  present; 
phelloderm not distinguishable; phloem a wide zone comprising of sieve t ubes, companion cells, phloem 
parenchyma and fibres, being traversed by uni to multi seriate medul lary rays, fibres arranged in tangential rows 
extending from one medullary ray to another alternating with bands of c eratenchyma; fibres long, thickwalled, 
lignified with tapering or peg like or bifurcated ends and measure upto 1680 µ in length; rosettes of calcium 
oxalate crystals present in a large number of parenchyma cells;   occasionally parenchyma cells also contain  
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and circular to oval st arch grains measuring 2 to 5 µ in diameter with hilum 
like a point in the centre. 
 
Powder - Shows fragments of cells of ceratenchyma, fibres with tapering or peg like or bifurcated ends, 
parenchyma cells containing prismatic and rosettes of calcium oxal ate crystals and starch grains; isolated rosettes 
and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate crystal and starch grains. 
 
The bark of Aphanamixis polystachya  (Wall.) Parker (Fam.Meliaceae), Syn. Amoora rohitak , also known as 
Rohitak can be  distinguished by the presence of stone cells in phelloderm, unis eriate medullary rays, crystal fibres 
in the phloem region and absence of rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals. 
 Ben. :  Harinahada, Roda rayana 
Eng. :  Rohituka tree 
Guj. :  Rohido 
Hin. :  Roheda 
Kan. :  Mullumuntala 
Mal. :  Chemmaram 
Mar. :  Rohida 
Pun. :  Rohira 
Tam. :  Malampulvan 
Tel. :  Rohitaka  CLXX  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter  - Not more than     2     per cent,   Appendix  2.2.2  
Total ash  -  Not more than   12     per cent,   Appendix  2.2.3   
Acid-insoluble ash  -  Not more than     1     per cent,   Appendix  2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than     10     per cent,   Appendix  2.2.6   
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than     15     per cent,   Appendix  2.2.7 
T.L.C. - 
  T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’  plate using toluene: ethyl acetate: methanol: acetic 
acid  (4:5:2:0:2) as mobile phase under UV 254 nm shows spots at R f. 0.15, 0.27 (both blue), 0.56 (light green), 
0.62, 0.70, 0.74 and 0.82 (all fluorescent white). 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Tecomin (veratroyl β-D-glucoside), n-triacontane, n-heptacosane,  
                      n-nonacosane, n-triacontanol, n-octacosanol, β-sitosterol. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Ka °u, Ka ¾¢ ya, Tikta 
Gu ¬¬ ¬¬a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a, Sara 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : V ¢tahara, Kaphahara, Rucya, Raktapras ¢dana, Medohara, Stanya,Vi ¾aghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Rohitakari ¾°a, Rohitaka lauha, Yakrt º¦ la vin ¢ºin ¤  
                                                             Va °ik ¢ 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Gulma (Abdominal lump), K ¨/uniF023mi (Helminthiasis), K āmal ā (Jaundice), Karnaroga 
(Disease of ear), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of skin), Medoroga (Obesity), Netraroga ( Diseases of the eye), 
Plihodara (Splenomegaly), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Raktado ¾a (Disorders of blood), Raktav ¤k¢ra 
(Disorders of blood), Śū la (Pain / Colic), Svetapradara (Leucorrhoea), Vibandha (Constipation) , Vra ´a 
(Ulcer), Yak ¨t (Liver) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 3 to 6 g. 
              Kv ¢tha (Decoction): 50 to 100. 
     
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
     CLXXI  ¹¡ ¹¡ ¹¡ ¹¡ LA (Heart Wood)  
 
   ¹¢ la consists of dried heartwood of Shorea robusta Gaertn.(Fam. Dipterocarpaceae), 
 a large sub-deciduous tree, found extensively in parts of North-East and Central India.  
   
SYNONYMS –  Sala 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. : Shaalgaach 
Eng. : Saltree, Shaal tree 
Guj. : Shaalvriksh 
Hin. : Saal, Sakhuaa, Saakhu 
Kan. : Kabba, Saal 
Mal. : Saalvriksham, Mulappumarutu 
Mar. : Shaalvriksh, Raalchaavriksha 
Ori. : Salva, Shaaluaagachha 
Pun. : Shala 
Tam. : Saalam 
Tel. : Guggilam 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic:  
 
Heartwood in blocks and cut cylindrical pieces, 10 to 12 cm long, 5 to 8 cm  broad and 1 to 2 cm thick, 
surface smooth with fine longitudional and interlocked striations; tra nsversely cut surface finely granulated; pores 
larger, distinctly visible, coarse; texture very hard, strong, toug h and heavy; pale brown when young and turning 
reddish brown with age.    
  
b) Microscopic:  
 
Growth ring indistinct; concentric bands of gum ducts represents fals e growth marks; diffuse porous, vessels 
scattered, large to moderately large, fairly distinct, mostly  solitary in short radial multiples of 2 or 3, pitted, pits 
simple to bordered, sometime occluded with tylosis; xylem parenchyma scanty to abundant, distinct as thin sheath 
around the vessel pore or groups of vessels, often confluent connecting adjacent vessel s and also diffused; fibres in 
tangential bands; medullary rays fine to moderately broad, heterogenous ,  3 to 6 seriate and 5 to 12 celled long; 
vertical gum duct present in long tangential bands appearing as white concentric li nes at irregular intervals.    
 
Powder - Reddish brown, on microscopic examination shows parenchymatous cells; pitted  
vessels with simple and  bordered pits, occluded with tyloses; fibres and gum ducts, radi ally  
cut medullary rays with large group of fibres.    
 
 
 
 
  CLXXII  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
 
Foreign matter   -  Not more than   2      per cent,  Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash   -  Not more than   2      per cent,  Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -  Not more than   0.7   per cent,  Appendix   2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive -  Not less than     6      per cent,  Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive -  Not less than     1.5   per cent,  Appendix   2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
                T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate  (0.2 mm thick) using toluene:ethyl 
acetate  : formic acid  (5:5:1), under UV 254 nm shows spots at R f. 0.14, 0.25, 0.31, 0.41, 0.55, 0.64 and 0.72. 
Under UV 366 shows spots at R f. 0.13 (brown), 0.17 (brown), 0.21 (brown), 0.26 (brown), 0.30 (brown), 0.35 
(brown), 0.57 (blue), 0.60 (blue), 0.64 (blue), 0.68 (blue), 0.75 (blue) and 0.85 (blue). 
 
CONSTITUENTS– Bergenin, shoreaphenol, chalcone, 4 ′-hydroxychalcone-4- O-β-D-glucopyranoside, 12 α-
hydroxy-3-oxo-olenano-28,13-lactone. 
  
PROPERTIES AND ACTION –  
 
Rasa : Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a : R¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Kaphahara, Medohara, Vra ´aºodhana, Gr ¢h¤,  
  Visaghna, Vedan ¢sth ¢pana, Stambhana, K ¨mighna 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Ayask ¨ti, El ¢di gh ¨ta, Sala Guna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES-  Agnidaha (Burns), Ka ´² u (Itching), Kr /uniF023mi (Helminthiasis), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / 
diseases of skin), P ¢´² u (Anaemia), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Raktav ¤k¢ra (Disorders of blood), ¹otha 
(Oedema), Upada ¼ºa (Syphilis / Soft chancre), V ¢tavy ¢dhi (Disease due ot Vata dosa), Vi ¾avik ¢ra 
(Disorders due to poison), Vidradhi (Abscess), Vra ´a (Ulcer), Yonidosa (Disease of female genital tract), 
Yoniroga (Disease of female genital tract), Karnaroga (Dise ase of ear), B ¢dhirya (Deafness), Asthibhagna 
(Bone fracture)  
  
DOSE -  C ¦r´a (Powder): 50 to 100 g. for decoction. 
               Kv ¢tha (Decoction): 50 to 100 ml. 
 
 
    
    
    
    
    
     CLXXIII  ¹¹ ¹¹¡¡ ¡¡LAPAR ³£³£ ³£³£ (Whole Plant) 
¹¢lapar ´¤ consists of dried whole plant of Desmodium gangeticum DC. (Fam. Fabaceae), a nearly erect 
undershrub, 0.6 to 2 m high, growing wild almost throughout India in the plains and Wester n Ghats, and upto 1500 
m in the north upto Sikkim. 
SYNONYMS – Sthir ¢, Tripar ´¤, Vid ¢rigandh ¢, A ¼º umat ¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. : Shalpaani 
Guj. : Saalvan, Sameravo  
Hin. : Sarivan, Saalapaani, Salpan 
Kan. : Murelchonne, Kolakannaru 
Mal. : Orila 
Mar. : Saalvan, Sarvan 
Ori. : Saloparnni, Salpatri  
Pun. : Sarivan, Shalpurni 
Tam. : Pulladi, Orila, Moovilai 
Tel. : Kolakuponna, Kolaponna 
Urd. : Shalwan 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
(a) Macroscopic: 
Root -Tap root, poorly developed, but lateral roots 15 to 30 cm long, and 0.1 to 0.8 cm thick, uni formly cylindrical 
with a number of branches; surface smooth bearing a number of transver se, light brown lenticels, bacterial nodules 
frequently present; light yellow; fracture fibrous; odour not characteristic;  taste, sweetish and mucilaginous. 
Stem - Stem are slender, upto 1.0 cm in diameter, branched, somewhat angular, cl othed with appressed greyish 
hairs, external surface brown, internal pale yellow; fracture, short; taste, sl ightly bitter. 
Leaf  -Leaf unifoliate, petiolate, stipulate, linear, oblong, acute or slight ly acuminate, striate at the base, about 6 to 
13 cm long and 3.5 to 7 cm broad, margins somewhat wavy, upper surface gla brous and green, lower surface pale 
and clothed with dense, soft, whitish appressed hairs. 
(b) Microscopic: 
Root  -Mature root shows cork, 3 to 7 layers of thin-walled, tangential elong ated cells, having a few prismatic 
crystals of calcium oxalate; cork cambium single layered; se condary cortex 4 to 10 layers of thin-walled, 
tangentially elongated cells having a few isolated cortical f ibres; secondary phloem composed of parenchyma, 
sieve tubes, companion cells and fibres; traversed by phloem rays; sieve tubes collapsed in outer region, but intact 
in inner region; phloem fibres slightly elongated, lignified; phloem rays uni t o multiseriate, 4 cells wide and 4 to 15 
cells high; outer xylem region having 1 or 2 growth rings, consisting of vessels, tracheids, xylem parenchyma, and 
xylem fibres, traversed by xylem rays; vessels, lignified, la rge, narrow, with both reticulate thickening or bordered 
pits; xylem parenchyma with rectangular or slightly elongated ce lls, resembling those of phloem parenchyma in 
shape but larger in size; xylem rays thick-walled possessing s imple pits, 1 to 5 cells wide and 4 to 12 cells high; 
simple , round to oval starch grains measuring 7 to 25 µ in diameter and prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate 
present in secondary phloem and secondary xylem.  CLXXIV  Stem  -TS shows, single layered epidermis of small, oval parenchyma cells covere d with thick brownish cuticle and 
interrupted at places by multicellular trichomes; a hypodermis consi sting of 3 or 4 layers of oval collenchyma cells; 
4 to 6 layers of cortex of oval parenchymatous cells interspersed w ith groups of sclereids; a narrow zone of 
secondary phloem composed of parenchyma, sieve elements and a few phloem  fibres present; a well developed 
secondary xylem consisting of large round xylem vessels occurring s ingly or in groups of 3 or 4, thick-walled 
tracheids, groups of fibres; uni- to biseriate medullary rays of r adially elongated cells; a few large circular, pitted 
cells of pith filled with starch grains and prismatic crystals of calcium oxa late. 
Leaf  -TS of leaf shows dorsiventral lamina consisting of a single lay ered cuticularized epidermis on both surfaces 
interrupted at places by unicellular warty trichomes; bilayered palisade of columnar cells; 3 or 4 layered spongy 
mesophyll of circular parenchyma cells; 1 to 4 centrally located vascular bundles in midrib region consisting of 
radially arranged xylem, phloem and capped by patch of sclerenchyma cells on ventral  side; 2 or 3 layered patch of 
collenchyma below upper epidermis and 3 or 4 layers of circular parenc hyma inside lower epidermis  in midrib 
region. 
Powder - Shows cork in surface view, patches of oval parenchyma cells of c ortex containing starch grains; 
fragments of radially cut medullary rays; stone cells of diff erent sizes; leaf epidermis in surface view showing 
paracytic stomata; pitted vessels; prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate and round, simple or 2 to 4 compound starch 
grains. 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter  - Not more than    2      per cent, Appendix   2.2.2  
Total ash   - Not more than    8      per cent, Appendix   2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash  - Not more than  2.5     per cent, Appendix   2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive - Not less than      6      per cent, Appendix   2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive - Not less than    10      per cent, Appendix   2.2.7  
T.L.C. - 
T.L.C. of ethanolic extract (cold maceration at room temperature) of  the drug on precoated silica gel ‘G’ 
60 F 254  TLC plate (0.2 mm thickness) using solvent system toluen : ethyl acetate:formic acid  (6:3:1) shows spots at 
Rf  0.56 (brown), 0.15 (violet), 0.24 (brownish-purple), 0.38  (brownish-purple), 0.41 (brownish-purpl e), 0.49 
(orange) , 0.73 (brown), 0.81 (red), 0.87 (green) and 0.96 (magenta) on spraying wit h anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid 
reagent  followed by heating at 105º for 10 minutes.  
CONSTITUENTS - Alkaloid: flavonoids, desmocarpin; pterocarpan, desmodin, gangetin, ganget inin; others: 2-
(N,N-dimethyl amino)acetophenone.  
  CLXXV   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Tikta, Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Guru, Snigdha 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Madhura 
Karma 
 : Balya, B ¨¼ ha ´a, M ¦trala, Ras ¢yna, Trido ¾ahara, V ¢tahara, V ¨¾ya  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Dashmularishta, Dashmulakwatha 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Ar ºa (Piles), Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), Chardi (Emesis), Jvara (Fever), K ¢sa (Cough), 
K¨mi (Worm infestation), K ¾ata (Wound), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Sant ¢pa 
(Emotional stress), ¹o¾a (Cachexia), ¹otha (Inflammation), ¹ukradaurbalya (Seminal stress), ¹v¢sa 
(Asthma), V ¢taroga (Disease due to Vata dosa), Vi ¾amjvara (Intermitten fever),  Vi ¾avik ¢ra (Disorders due 
to poison) 
  
DOSE –  C ¦r´a (Powder): 6 to12 g. 
               Kv ¢tha (Decoction): 50 to 100 ml.  CLXXVI  ¹¹ ¹¹AM ££££    (Leaf) 
 
                                        ¹ am £ consists of the leaves  of Prosopis cineraria  Druce Syn. P. spicigera  L. (Fam. Leguminosae – 
Mimosaceae), a small to moderate sized tree found in the dry and arid regions of India.  
 
SYNONYMS –  Ke ºahantr ¤, Saktuphala, ¹a¬kuphalik ¢, Tu ¬ga  
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. :  Sain, Shami 
Eng. :  Spunge tree 
Guj. :  Kheejado, Sami  
Hin. :  Chhonkar, Sami, Chhikur, Jhand, Khejra 
Kan. :  Banni, Kabanni 
Mal. :  Parampu, Tambu, Vahni 
Mar. :  Sami, Saunder 
Ori. :  Shami 
Pun. :  Jand  
Tam. :  Vanni 
Tel. :  Jammi  
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a)  Macroscopic: 
 
Bipinnnately compound leaves with pulvinus, borne on a rachis 2 to 8 cm long;  loose pinnae and pinnules 
present; pinnae 7 to 12 pairs, each pinna bearing 7 to 12 pairs  of pinnules, pinnule oblong rounded and mucronate, 
8 to 10 mm long, 2 to 3 mm broad. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Rachis - Transverse section roughly triangular with abaxial side rather curved, and adaxia l a blunt pyramid; cuticle 
thick, epidermis single layered, unicellular trichome present; cor tex of large parenchymatous cells, a few outer 
layer being chlorenchymatous, more on the adaxial side than on abaxial si de; vascular system ectophloic 
siphonostele consisting of a central main bundle and two adaxial access ory bundles with sclerenchyma cap; a thin 
parenchymatous plate present in the central bundle between the two shal low  arcs of xylem surrounded by phloem; 
a thick sclerenchymatous bundle sheath with stone cells and fibres surrounds the stele; xylem elements generally in 
radial rows. 
 
Petiole  - Almost triangular, with a projection on abaxial side; trichomes uni cellular, long, ground tissue 
chlorenchymatous, more so on adaxial side than on abaxial side, rest being parenchymatous, with minute 
intercellular spaces; vascular system consists of central main bundl e and two adaxial lateral accessory bundles with 
sclerenchyma cap; a thin parnchymatous plate present in the central  bundle between the two shallow arcs of xylem 
surrounded by phloem; 3 or 4 layers of sclerenchymatous bundle sheath present  comprising stone cells and fibres 
the stele; vessels angular, thin walled, solitary; thick walled fibres pre sent. 
 
 
  CLXXVII  Leaf -   
 
Midrib – Cuticle thick; epidermis single layered; palisade parenchyma of  2 or 3 layers over the midrib region, a 
central large vascular bundle present with xylem and a wide conspic uous patch of sclerenchyma fibres below the 
phloem; large parenchyma cells present on the abaxial side extend upto the lower epider mis. 
   
Lamina  –Isobilateral; cuticle thick; epidermis single layered; palisade parenc hyma 3 to 5 layers on the adaxial side 
and 2 or 3 layers on the abaxial side; spongy parenchyma present in middl e region; epidermis in surface view 
showed straight walls and unicellular trichome present in both the epiderm is; stomata present in both surfaces with 
overarching subsidiary cells, stomatal number for lower epidermis 32 to 35 / mm 2, upper epidermis 29 to 32 / mm 2; 
stomata paracytic; palisade ratio for upper epidermis 5 to 7, lower  epidermis 2 to 4, stomatal index 9 to 12, vein 
islet number14 to 16, veinlet termination number 28 to 32. 
 
Powder – Greenish, no characteristic odour and taste, unicellular trichomes, st one cells and elongated stone cells 
from sclerenchymatous bundle sheath, fibres of upto 450 µ present, simple circular starch grains 3 to 10 in 
diameter seen, scalariform and pitted vessels also noticed. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
 
Foreign matter    - Not more than     1   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash    -  Not more than     7   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash   -  Not more than     1   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive -  Not less than     14   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  -  Not less than     21   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7 
Fixed oil    - Not more than     4   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
 T.L.C. of chloroform extract on aluminium plate precoated with silica  gel ‘G’ 60 F 254   (0.2 mm thickenss) 
using toluene:ethyl acetate  (9:1) under UV 366 nm shows fluorescent spots at R f.  0.14, 0.20, 0.26, 0.30 (all pink), 
0.33 (dark pink) 0.44 (white), 0.48 (pink), 0.54 (navy blue), 0.86 (pink) and 0.90 (white).  On exposure to iodine 
vapour ,  spots at R f. 0.14, 0.23, 0.26, 0.28, 0.33, 0.40, 0.44, 0.48 and 0.90 (all yellowish brown).  On dipping the 
plate in vanillin-sulphuric acid reagent  and heating at 105° for 5 minutes, spots appear at   R f.  0.14, 0.23, 0.33, 
0.38 (all grey), 0.44 (dark blue), 0.48 (dark violet), 0.83 (blue), 0.90 and 0.95 (both violet). 
                              
CONSTITUENTS – Tannin rich foliage, volatile fatty acid.  
  CLXXVIII    
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION- 
 
Rasa :   Tikta, Ka °u, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a :   Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya :   ¹ ¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka :    Ka °u 
Karma :    Ar ºoghna, K ¨mighna, Kaphapittahara, Ku ¾°haghna, Recaka,   
     Sa ´gr ¢haka,V ¢takara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES-  Ar ºa (Piles), Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), B ¢lagraha (Psychotic syndrome of children), 
Bhrama (Vertigo), K ¨mi (Worm infestation), K ¢sa (Cough), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of skin), Netraroga 
(Diseases of the eye), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), ¹v¢sa (Asthma), Vi ¾avik ¢ra (Disorders due to poison)  
 
DOSE – C¦r´a ( Powder): 3 to 5 g.  CLXXIX  SAURABHANIMBA (Leaf) 
 
Saurabhanimba  consists of the dried leaves of Murraya koenigii (L.) Spreng                           Syn. M. 
koenigii. Spreng (Fam. Rutaceae), a small tree reaching upto 6 m with dark  grey bark and aromatic leaves, found 
and cultivated almost throughout India and the Andaman Islands upto an altit ude of 1,500 m, for its culinary uses 
as a flavouring spice. 
 
SYNONYMS –  Surabhinimba, Kai °arya, Kai ²arya 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass. : Narasingha 
Ben. : Bansang, Kariaphulli 
Eng. : Curry leaf  
Guj. : Gornimb, Kadhilimdo 
Hin. : Mitha neem, Kadhi Patta, Kadi Patta 
Kan. : Karibaevu 
Mal. : Kariveppu  
Mar. : Kadhinim, Poospala, Godnimb  
Ori. : Bhursunga 
Pun. : Kadhi Patta 
Tam. : Karivempu, Karuveppilei 
Tel. : Karivepaku, Karivemu 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic : 
 
Leaves are compound, imparipinnate, petiolate, exstipulate, rachis 11 to 20 cm long; leaflets 11 to 25, 
shortly petiolulate, arranged alternately on the rachis; lower pai rs comparatively smaller in size, obliquely ovate, 2 
to 5 cm in length and 1 to 2.5 cm in width, tip acute to obtuse, margin cre nate-dentate, glabrous adaxially and 
pubescent abaxially with interspersed gland dots; main vein one and lat eral veins 14 to 20 pairs; odour, 
characteristically aromatic; taste, acrid. 
 
b) Microscopic : 
 
Rachis – TS through rachis shows epidermis a single layer of isodiametric  cells covered by thick cuticle; 
unicellular, non-glandular, curved, gradually tapering  trichomes measur ing 37 to 45 µ long and 2 to 5 µ broad, 
present; base of trichome swollen and embedded in epidermis, cortex many  layered, parenchymatous, hypodermal 
cortical cells are smaller, isodiametric, compactly arrange d, inner cortical cells are larger, elongated tangentially, 
loosely arranged with intercellular spaces; abundant pyramidal cal cium oxalate crystals measuring 12 to 25 µ in 
length and 5 to 15 µ in breadth, several showing twinning, present in cortical cells; cor tex in the hypodermal region 
is traversed by lysigenous cavities;  vascular bundle is encir cled by a ring of 2 or 3 layered sclerenchymatous 
pericycle and consists of vessels with annular and spiral thickeni ngs, arranged in radiating rows, xylem 
parenchyma and xylem fibres with thick walls; phloem is situated towards  the periphery of xylem ring and contains 
sieve tubes, companion cells, phloem parenchyma and phloem fibres; medulla ry rays uniseriate, numerous, with  CLXXX  cells containing calcium oxalate crystals; pith large, made up of t hin walled parenchymatous cells, several of which 
are pitted. 
 
Leaf - 
 
Midrib – TS of leaf through midrib region flat towards adaxial surface and r idged towards abaxial surface; 
unicellular, non glandular trichomes arise from the abaxial epidermis ; adaxial and abaxial hypodermis  bi or tri 
seriate, composed of isodiametric collenchymatous cells; collenchym atous cells of both the surfaces possess single 
and twinned rhomboid calcium oxalate crystals, ground tissue composed of loos ely arranged, thick-walled 
isodiametric parenchymatous cells; vascular bundle forms an arc w ith adaxial xylem and abaxial phloem; xylem 
comprises of vessels with annular and spiral thickenings, xylem par enchyma and fibres; phloem contains sieve 
tubes, phloem parenchyma and phloem fibres. 
 
Lamina - TS shows both the adaxial and abaxial epidermis covered by a cuticle; abaxial epidermal cells narrow and 
laterally elongated while those on adaxial surface slightly radi ally elongated; palisade biseriate, concentric starch 
grains of 3 to 5 µ diameter are found in spongy cells, spongy parenchyma made up of loosely  arranged 
chlorenchyma; lysigenous cavities present; epidermal cells of l amina in surface view are elongated, straight walled 
and polygonal; in costal region they are elongated and thin walled; st omata more on abaxial surface than on 
adaxial; paracytic; stomatal index of abaxial epidermis 16 to18 and of adaxial epidermis 13 to 15; unicellular, non 
glandular, gradually tapering, curved trichomes measuring 80 to 160 µ long and 6 to 15 µ broad are distributed on 
the abaxial epidermal layers;  trichomes  numerous on costal regi on and fewer on intercostal regions, leaving 
cicatrices after detachment. 
 
Powder - Slightly oily, characteristically aromatic, acrid, light gre enish; epidermal cells, unicellular thick walled, 
long trichomes gradually tapering towards the tip from rachis and l amina; stomata, palisade cells, collenchyma, 
vessels with annular and spiral thickenings and pyramidal crystal s of calcium oxalate, several showing twinning 
also present. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH  – 
 
Foreign matter :     Not more than     2    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash :     Not more than   12    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash :     Not more than     2    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  :     Not less than     20    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive   :     Not less than     34    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.7 
 
 T.L.C. - 
 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on precoated silicagel ‘G’ plate using n-hexane: ethyl acetate  (9:1) under UV 
366 nm shows spots at R f. 0.17. 0.27, 0.55, 0.64, 0.82, 0.90; on spraying the plate with modified Dragendorff’s 
reagent, spots appear at R f.  0.15, 0.17 and 0.27. On spraying with 5% methanolic sulphuric acid reagent  and 
heating the plate for 10 minutes 105 °, spots at R f. 0.10, 0.15, 0.17, 0.27, 0.55 and 0.64 . 
 
CONSTITUENTS  -Alkaloids like koenidine, koenigine, koenimbine, mahanimbine,   
 muconine murrayacine and volatile oils. 
 
 
 
 
  CLXXXI   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa : Ka ¾¢ ya, Tikta,  Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, Snigdha 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Kaphapittahara, Rucya, D ¤pana, P ¢cana, Vi ¾aghna,   
  Var ´ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Dodi Guna  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Ar ºa (Piles), Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), Chardi (Emesis), D ¢ha (Burning sensation), 
Du ¾°a vra ´a (Non-healing ulcer), Jvara (Fever),  Ka ´² u (Itching), Kr /uniF023mi (Helminthiasis), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / 
diseases of skin), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Prav ¢hik ¢ (Dysentery), Śū la (Pain / Colic), ¹o¾a 
(Emaciation), ¹opha (Oedema), ¹vitra (Leucoderma / Vitiligo)  
 
DOSE –  C ¦r´a ( Powder): 3 to 6 g. 
              Svarasa (Juice): 10 to 20 ml.  CLXXXII  ¹¹ ¹¹ITIV ¡¡ ¡¡RAKA (Seed) 
 
¹itiv ¢raka  consists of seeds of Celosia argentea L. (Fam. Amaranthaceae), an erect glabrous annual herb, 
30 to 90 cm high, with conical to oblong feathery flowering spikes found com monly growing as a weed in 
cultivated fields throughout India upto an altitude of 1500 m. 
 
SYNONYMS-  Siriv ¢lik ¢, Kura ´² a, Kura ´°ik ¢, ¹itav ¢ra,  ¹ r¤v¢raka, Sitiv ¢ra  
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben.            :   Sushunimaak, Shushunishaak 
Eng.           :   Silver spiked cock’s comb 
Guj.           :   Laanpadi, Lonpadi 
Hin.           :   Siriyaari, Suravaali, Siravaari 
Mar.           :   Kuradu, Karadu, Surali 
Pun.           :   Suravaali 
Tam.       :   Pannaikkeerai   
Urd.          :   Suravaali 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
 
a) Macroscopic:  
 
Seeds lenticular, smooth, shining black or brown, 0.9 to 1.8 mm in diameter, hi lum prominent, present in a 
pit; embryo curved; no odour; taste, bland. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
         TS of seed shows testa, composed of a thin epidermis and groups of reddi sh columnar cells arranged in 
pyramid structures on an inner horizontal layer of thick walled elong ated cells; yellow collapsed integument lined 
internally by cuticle; a layer of lignified squarish cells; e ndosperm of polygonal parenchymatous cells containing 
numerous alerurone grains and fixed oil. 
 
Powder – Light grey, shows fragments of deep brown to reddish testa of polygonal c ells bearing reticulate network 
of pits; lignified cells showing striation in surface view; par enchymatouous cells of endosperm containing 
numerous aleurone grains and fixed oil; and parenchymatous cells of embryo. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Foreign matter  -       Not more than 2 per cent, Appendix 2.2.2  
Total ash   -       Not more than 5 per cent, Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -       Not more than 1 per cent, Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractvie -       Not less than   3 per cent, Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive -       Not less than  7  per cent,  Appendix 2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. –  
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract of the drug on precoated silica gel ‘ G’ 60 F 254   (0.2 mm thickness) using 
toluene:ethyl acetate  (95:7) shows spots at R f. 0.12 (violet), 0.20 (greenish-grey), 0.31 (yellow), 0.36 (violet), 0.59 
(violet) and 0.78 (purple), on spraying at anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid reagen t followed by heating at 105 o for 10 
minutes.  CLXXXIII   
CONSTITUENTS – Nonapeptide, celogenamide, celosian, an acidic polysaccharide .   
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION- 
 
Rasa        :    Ka ¾¢ ya, Madhura, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a           :     R ¦k¾a, Guru, Sara 
V¤¤¤¤rya           :    ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka         :    Madhura 
Karma          :    Trido ¾ahara, Basti ºodhaka, Sa ¼gr ¢h¤, M ¦trala, V ¨¾ ya, Snehana, Medhya,       
                             Rs ¢yana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Kaphaja mutra krchranasaka sitivarak, Sitivaraka bija   
                                                             Curna, Sitivara Guna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES-   Aºmar ¤ (Calculus), Ar śa (Piles), Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), Gulma (Abdominal lump), 
H¨droga (Heart disease), Jvara (Fever);  M ¦tr ¢gh ¢ta (Urinary obstruction), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), Pl ¤h¢roga 
(Splenic disease), Raktav ¤k¢ra (Disorders of blood), ¹opha (Oedema) 
 
DOSE- C¦r´a (Powder):  3 to 6 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CLXXXIV  ¹¹ ¹¹IVA-N££££L££££ (Root and Stem)  
 
¹iva-n£l£ consists of the dried roots and stems of Indigofera aspalathoides  Vahl ex DC. (Fam.  Fabaceae), a 
stiff silvery, hoary under shrub with trifoliate leaves, found in the plains of South Indi a.   
 
SYNONYMS –  Bh ¦- n ¤l¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION  - 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
Root   -Roots 8 to 10 cm long 2 to 5 mm thick, cylindrical , bearing lateral roots, light brown, surface smooth with 
transverse lenticels; fracture   entire, fractured surface shows  a thin bark and a compact light coloured central 
cylinder of wood; odour and taste indistinct. 
 
Stem  -Stem pieces 2 to 5 mm in thickness and of various lengths;  surfac e smooth, dark brown, with vertical series 
of lenticels, fracture short, fractured surface fibrous, with a thi n bark, thick pale coloured wood and a central 
narrow pith; odour and taste indistinct. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Root  –TS circular, shows cork composed of tangentially elongated, rectangul ar, compactly arranged, stratified, 
thick walled, suberised cells some filled with tannins; secondary cortex multiseriate, composed of loosely arranged, 
isodiametric, parenchymatous cells; and some cells filled with num erous rhomboidal calcium oxalate crystals of 
about 6 to 12 µ size; phloem  consists of fibres along with other phloem elements;  wood wide with numerous 
xylem elements and fibres; vessels aggregated in groups of 2 to 4;   wall  thickenings   scalariform and reticulate, 
xylem fibres numerous, polygonal, 10 to 15 µ in diameter, very much thickened  with lignin and with a narrow 
lumen;    xylem rays  3 to 5 seriate, short, fusiform, walls pitted. 
 
Stem  -TS  circular, cork interrupted by lenticels; cork cambium present ; secondary cortex 6 to 8 seriate, peripheral 
2 to 3 layers composed of isodiametric cells; inner layers with tangentially much elongated, thin walled, 
parenchymatous cells containing abundant prismatic calcium oxalate cr ystals, phloem contains sieve tubes, 
companion cells, fibres and parenchyma; phloem parenchyma  contains prism atic calcium oxalate crystals, fibres in 
groups of 3 or 4, scattered;  xylem contains vessels, fibres and pare nchyma; vessels arranged in 40 to 60 radiating 
rows, each row containing 2 to 10 pitted vessel elements of different  sizes; cross wall oblique; fibres numerous, 
polygonal, 10 to 15 µ in diameter and 225 to 280 µ in length with tapering ends, walls much thickened with lignin; 
simple pits present, and lumen very narrow; rays  mostly uniseria te; rarely biseriate; pith composed of thin walled, 
loosely arranged, parenchymatous cells. 
 Eng. : Wiry indigo 
Kan. : Shiva-malli, Nila 
Mal. : Sivanar vayambu, Manneli 
Mar. : Shiva-nimba 
Tam. : Sivanarvembu  
Tel. : Nela vempali  CLXXXV  Powder – Brown, shows the presence of tangentially elongated, stratified cork  cells, prismatic calcium oxalate 
crystals, vessels with scalariform thickenings and bordered pits  arranged in vertical rows, fibres measuring 225 to 
280 µ long, occasionally with simple pits.   
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH  - 
 
Foreign matter             -           Not more than   2   per cent,   Appendix  2.2.2 
Total ash            -          Not more than   8    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash            -          Not more than   3    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive              -          Not less than     8    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive                -          Not less than   13    per cent,   Appendix  2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate using n-hexane:ethyl acetate  (9:1) under UV 366 nm  
shows spots at R f. 0.12, 0.35 and 0.59 (all blue); on exposure to iodine vapour   spots appear at R f.0.12, 0.29, 0.35 
and 0.59 (yellow), on spraying with 5% methanolic sulphuric acid reagent  and heating the plate for 10 minutes at 
105 °  spots appear at R f. 0.12, 0.29, 0.35, and 0.59(brown). 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Fixed oil. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Tikta, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : Laghu, R ¦ksa 
: U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Kapha V ¢tahara, Ke ºya, Ku ¾°haghna 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as simgle drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - Amavata (Rheumatism), Aru ¼¾ika (Dandruff), Danta º¦ la (Tooth ache), Gulma 
(Abdominal lump), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of skin), Pl ¤ha-roga (Splenic disease), Udararoga (Diseases 
of abdomen), Vatarakta (Gout), Vidradhi (Abscess), Visarpa (Erysepales) 
 
DOSE – C¦r´a ( Powder): 3 to 6 g. 
    
    
    
     CLXXXVI  ¹¹ ¹¹LE ½½ ½½M¡¡ ¡¡TAKA (Fruit) 
¹le ¾m¢taka  consists of dried, ripe fruits of Cordia dichotoma  Forst. f. Syn. C. obliqua Willd., C. 
myxa  Roxb.  (Fam. Boraginaceae), a medium sized tree with short crooked t runk with drooping 
branches, distributed throughout warmer parts of India. 
 
SYNONYMS-  Bahuv ¢ra ª, ¹elu  
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass.       :   Dilk  
Ben.      :   Bahnaree, Bahuvar  
Eng.      :   Sebesten  
Guj.      :   Gundaavada, Gundaa  
Hin.      :   Lasora, Lisodaa  
Kan.     :   Challe kaayi  
Mal.     :   Naruvari, Naruviri  
Mar.     :   Bhonkar  
Pun.     :   Lasuda  
Tam.   :   Naruvili, Narivilee  
Tel.     :   Nakkera  
 
DESCRIPTION - 
a) Macroscopic: 
  Fruits conical with acute apex, upto 2 cm in length and 1.5 cm in diamete r, occasionally with attached 
calyx and pedicel, greyish brown to dark brown, surface shrunken, hard to break; odour, specific;  taste, indistinct. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
Epicarp shows single layer of thick walled and tangentially elong ated cells covered externally with thick 
cuticle; most of the area just below the epicarp occupied by large  patches of stone cells; mesocarp consists of thin 
walled and collapsed parenchyma cells,  patches of fibres with a f ew stone cells, numerous secretory canals lined 
by 5 to 7 epithelial cells as well as small vascular bundles di stributed in the central and lower region of mesocarp;  
small circular to oval starch grain and rosette of calcium oxal ate crystals present in a few parenchyma cells; 
endocarp represented by 4 to 6 layers of thick walled polygonal stone c ells with narrow lumen; testa thin walled 
and single layered; cotyledon consists of thick walled parenchyma c ells containing simple, small, circular to oval 
starch grains, measuring 5 to 10 µ in diameter with hilum as a point in the centre. 
 
Powder- Powder shows fragments of fibres with tapering or pointed ends, parenchy ma cells with rosette of 
calcium oxalate crystals and starch grains, polygonal stone cells  with wide lumen and pitted walls, stone cells with 
highly thickened walls and narrow lumen, scalariform vessels, fra gments of secretory canals and thick walled cells 
of epicarp, thick walled parenchyma cells of cotyledon with starch grains. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
Foreign matter   -  Not more than 2  per cent,    Appendix 2.2.2  
Total ash   - Not more than 9  per cent,    Appendix 2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash   -  Not more than 1  per cent,    Appendix 2.2.4   CLXXXVII  Alcohol-soluble extractive  -  Not less than   7  per cent,    Appendix 2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than 30  per cent,    Appendix 2.2.7 
 
T.L.C.- 
  
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plat e using toluene: ethyl acetate: acetic 
acid: methanol  (6:4:2:2) under UV 254 nm shows spots at R f. 0.20, 0.26,0.33, 0.35, 0.52 (all blue), 
0.58, 0.67, 0.83, 0.86, 0.39, 0.79 and 0.92 (all pi nk). 
 
CONSTITUENTS - β-sitosterol, palmitic, stearic and oleic acids. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
                                  ¡ma Phala     Pakva-phala  
Rasa              :      Madhura, Tikta, Ka ¾¢ ya              Madhura  
Gu ´´ ´´a             :      Laghu, R ¦k¾a               Snigdha, Guru  
V¤¤¤¤rya             :      ¹¤ta                 ¹¤ta  
Vipaka          :      Ka °u     Madhura  
Karma           :      Pittahara, Kaphahar, Gr¢h¤                            Pittahara, B ¨¼ hana, V ¨¾ ya 
                                                                            R ¦cya, Cak ¾u¾ya,  
                                                                     Ke ºa-K¨¾´¤kara ´a 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Gojihv ¢di Kv ¢tha C ¦r´a 
THERAPEUTIC USES-   Jvara (Fever), K āsa (Ccough), K¨mi (Worm infestation), Pratisyaya (Coryza), 
Raktado ¾a (Disorders of blood), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), Sukradaurbalya (Seminal  stress), Śvāsa (Asthma), 
T¨¾´ ā (Thirst), Upada ¼aºa (Syphilis / Soft chancre), Vatapittajanya (Due to Vata and Pitta dosa), Vik āra 
(Abnormality) 
                        
DOSE-   Pakva phala p ¢naka (Syrup of ripened fruit):  10 to 20 ml. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CLXXXVIII  ¹¹ ¹¹LE ½½ ½½M¡¡ ¡¡TAKA (Stem Bark)  
¹le¾m¢taka  consists of dried stem bark of Cordia dichotoma  Forst. f. C. obliqua  Willd.,  C. myxa Roxb. 
(Fam. Boraginaceae), a medium sized tree with short crooked trunk  with drooping branches , distributed 
throughout warmer parts of India. 
 
SYNONYMS-  Bahuv ¢rah, ¹elu  
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass.             :   Dilk  
Ben.         :   Bahnaree, Bahuvar  
Eng.         :   Sebesten  
Guj.             :   Vadagunda  
Hin.             :   Lasora, Lisodaa  
Kan.             :   Chikkachalli, Doduchallu  
Mal.             :   Naruvari, Naruviri  
Mar.            :   Bhonkar  
Pun.             :   Lasuda  
Tam.            :   Naruvili, Narivilee  
Tel.              :   Nakkera  
 
DESCRIPTION- 
a) Macroscopic: 
 Bark in pieces of 5 to 10 cm long and 6 to 12 mm thick; dark greyish brown, surfa ce rough with transverse and 
longitudinal cracks and fissures, inner surface deep greyish; frac ture tough, fractured surface horny; taste and odour 
indistinct. 
b) Microscopic:  
Bark shows wide cork consisting of rectangular and tangentially e longated cells,  rhytidoma present; 
phellogen indistinct; phelloderm composed of thin walled tangentially el ongated cells; phloem wide consisting of 
sieve tubes, companion cells, phloem parenchyma and fibres, traversed by  uni to biseriate medullary rays, fibres 
present in tangential bands alternating with bands of ceratenchyma e xtending from one medullary ray to another; 
fibres very long with narrow lumen and tapering, pointed or blunt ends. 
 
Powder- Shows fragments of thin walled parenchyma cells, long thic k walled fibres, groups of 
elongated cells of ceratenchyma and cork cells.  
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
Foreign matter   -  Not more than     2    per cent,     Appendix 2.2.2   
Total ash   - Not more than   17    per cent,     Appendix 2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash   - Not more than  0.6    per cent,     Appendix 2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive  -  Not less than       9    per cent,     Appendix 2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive   -  Not less than       4    per cent,     Appendix 2.2 .7 
 
T.L.C.-  
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’  plate using chloroform: ethyl  acetate: formic acid 
(3:6:1) under UV 254 nm shows spots at R f. 0.16,0.28, 0.48, 0.59, 0.80 (all brown ).  
  CLXXXIX  CONSTITUENTS- Gallic acid and β-sitosterol.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
Rasa  : Madhura, Tikta, Ka ¾¢ ya, Katu 
Gu ´´ ´´a  : R¦k¾a, Picchila  
V¤¤¤¤rya  : ¹¤ta  
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Pittahara, Kaphahara, Ke ºya, Vi ¾tambhi, Gr ¢h¤, K ¨mighna, P ¢cana, Vi ¾aghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS-  Used as single drug     
THERAPEUTIC USES-  Amados (Semi-disgested food metabolites), Bahuvrana (Multiple injuri es / Ulcers), 
Drkjata-masurika (Occular manifestation of small pox), K ¨mi-ºula ( Colic due to worm infestation), Ku ¾°ha 
(Leprosy / diseases of skin), L ¦t¢vi ¾a (Spider bite), Masurika (Small pox), Raktado ¾a (Disorders of blood), Tvak-
roga (Skin diseases), Visarpa (Erysepales), Visphota (Blister), Vra ´a (Ulcer) 
 
DOSE -- --    Kv ¢tha (Decoction): 50 to 100 ml. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
    
    
    
    
    
     CXC ¹¹ ¹¹L££££PAD ¡¡ ¡¡RIKANDA (Tuber) 
 
 ¹l¤pad ¢rikanda consists of fresh or dry tuber  of Typhonium trilobatum Schott. (Fam. Araceae), a perennial 
herb with a broadly ovate, open spathe and hastate leaves found in parts of peninsular India, and from Yamuna 
eastwards to north - eastern states. 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. :  Ghetkochu 
Mal. :  Chenna 
Tam. :  Pitikarunai  
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
 Rhizome fusiform, light brown outside, creamish inside, flaky and peeling off on the outer  surface, bearing 
bud primordia and wiry, unbranched, thin adventitious rootlets; rhizomes or tubers usua lly available in transversely 
cut pieces 4 cm long and 2.5 to 6.5 cm in diameter; fracture, short; starchy; taste, slig htly acrid. 
  
b) Microscopic: 
 
 A few layers of thin walled corky cells form the outermost te gumentary tissue;   cambium lying below the 
bark irregular, discontinuous and usually 2 to 5 layered; below the cambi um a few layers made of parenchymatous 
cells free from starch grains; cortex or ground tissue consisting  of thin walled, parenchymatous, angular or 
polygonal cells rich in simple and aggregate starch grains; gr ains clear, without striations, hilum 2 to 3 stellate; 
simple grains mostly ovoid or sub-spherical, compound grains polyhedral or  sub-spherical with 2 to 6 units;  
idioblasts containing raphide bundles and some cells with dark contents s cattered in the cortex;  a distinct 
endodermis not seen; vascular bundles scattered, running obliquely in the g round tissue and consisting of xylem 
comprising a few vessels with spiral and annular thickening, and par enchyma; phloem comprises of sieve tubes and 
companion cells; some of the vascular bundles may be surrounded by rings of cork cells. 
 
Powder – Creamish, fine in texture, tasteless and starchy; microscopy shows   abundant single and 2 to 6 
membered compound starch grains, usually up to 45 µ in size and raphides up to 50 µ in length, loose or in bundles 
of up to 100 µ in length, and  vessel fragments with spiral thickenings.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH –  
 
Foreign matter      -    Not more than    1   per cent,  Appendix  2.2.2 
Total ash       -    Not more than    3   per cent,  Appendix  2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash      -    Not more than    1   per cent,  Appendix  2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive     -    Not less than      9   per cent,  Appendix  2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive     -    Not less than    21   per cent,  Appendix  2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. – 
 T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on silica gel ‘G’ F 254 using toluene: ethyl acetate: acetic acid  
(6.5:3.1:0.4), on spraying the plate with anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid  reagent  and heating the plate for 5 minutes at 
105 o shows spots at R f. 0.10, 0.19 (light violet), 0.53 (violet), 0.57 (violet) and 0.68 (dark violet). 
  CXCI  CONSTITUENTS – β –sitosterol and unidentified sterols.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa :   Ka °u, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a :  T ¤k¾´ a, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  U ¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka :   Ka °u 
Karma :  Ar ¾oghna, ¹othahara, Lekhana, Vi ¾aghna, D ¤pana, P ¢cana, ¹¦lapra ºamana  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES-  Agnim āndya (Digestive impairment), Arbuda (Tumor), Ar śa (Piles), Rakt ¢rºa 
(Bleeding piles), ¹otha (Oedema), Sarpadam ºa (Snake bite), Slipada (Fliariasis), Udarroga (Diseases of 
abdomen) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder) :  5 to 10 g daily dose after Sodhana.  CXCII  SPH ££££TAK £¯¡ £¯¡ £¯¡ £¯¡ R££££ (Rhizome) 
 
Sph ¤tak ¤°¢ r¤ consists of the dried rhizome with frond bases of Dryopteris filix – mas (L.) Schott. Syn. 
Aspidium filix-mas L. (Fam. Dryopteridaceae), a fern distributed practically all over temperate regions; the drug is 
imported into India. Indian species are D. schimperiane, D. marginata, D. odontoloma, D. ba rbiflora, D. blandtorchi 
occurring in the Himalayas. 
 
SYNONYMS -  Salka par ´¢¬ga, Granthi-p¢dik ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
 Rhizome thick, cylindrical, dark brown to black in colour, 6 to 25 cm lo ng and 2 to 4 cm in diameter and 
covered by the base of petioles; frond bases are ha rd, persistent, dark brown and curved; the petiole bases and the 
younger parts of the rhizome are completely covered by the brown, dense silky and shining, chaffy scales termed 
ramentae; odourless, taste at first sweetish, becoming  bitter and extremely nauseous. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Rhizome  -Epidermis single layered, unicellular and covered by thick cuticl e, followed by hypodermis composed of 
sclerenchymatous cells with dark resinous contents;  the ground tissue is made up of thick walled parench yma cells 
packed with starch grains; about 6 to 9 meristeles em bedded in the ground tissue in a circle; each merist ele 
enclosed by a layer of pericycle and endodermis, th is is followed by moderately thick walled phloem; xyl em occupies 
the centre of the meristele and consists of trachei ds; intercellular spaces in the rhizome of Male fer n shows the 
secreting glands; the marginal cells of the ramenta is  prolonged at intervals into hair like processes, that ar e 
formed by two contiguous cells parallel to each other; glandular proce ss absent; the cells of the ramentum are 
slightly thick walled, narrow and elongated longitudinally. 
 
Powder -Brown, isolated tracheids with scalariform thickeni ngs, oblique walls, parenchyma cells with starch 
grains measuring about 15 to 20 µ in size present; stalked glands, ramental hairs, sclerenchymat ous and marginal 
cells also seen.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter  - Not more than   2  per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash  - Not more than   5 per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  - Not more than  0.1 per cent,    Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than   12 per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than   13 per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7 
Fixed oil                                          -    Not less than     3 per cent,   Appendix   2.2.8 Ben. :  Pankharaaj 
Eng. :  Male fern 
Hin. :  Keeldaaru, Bisauraa 
Tam. 
Urd. :  Iruvi  
:  Sarakhsa  CXCIII   
T.L.C.  – 
 
 T.L.C. of dichloromethane extract on aluminium plate precoated with sili ca gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  (0.2 mm 
thickness) using toluene : ethyl acetate  (9:1) shows  spots at R f.  0.2 (dark grey), 0.36 (violet), 0.4 (dark grey), 0.42 
(violet), 0.5 (orange), 0.68 (yellow), 0.82 (yellow) on dipping the pl ate in vanillin - sulphuric acid reagent  and 
heating at 105°for 5 minutes. 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Filicin; α-flavaspidic acid; albaspidin; filixic acid; hexadeca  aspidinol;  dropterin; filmarone; 
β-aspidin; 9-aliphatic alcohols and 3 sterols. 
 
PROPERTIES AND  ACTION - 
Rasa : Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma            : Lekhana, Virecana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug  
THERAOEUTIC USES-  Jvara (Fever),  Sphita K ¨mi (Tape worm), V ¢tarakta (Gout) 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 1 to  3 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CXCIV  SP §§ §§KK ¡¡ ¡¡ (Whole Plant) 
  
 Sp ¨kk ¢ consists of the dried entire plant of Anisomeles malabarica  (L.) R. Br. ex Sims (Fam. Lamiaceae), a 
densely pubescent, aromatic, 1.2 to 2 m high perennial herb, commonly found in the  Western Ghats from 
Maharashtra to Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. 
 
SYNONYMS –  Sprk, Dev ¤, Vadh ¦, Sugandh ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben.            :    Sprk, Dev ¤, Vadh ¦, Sugandh ¢ 
Guj.            :    Karpooree, Madhuree 
Hin.            :    Asabarag, Asarak 
Kan.            :   Nalehullu, Hikke 
Mar.            :   Karpoorvallee 
Tam.            :  Irattai Peymarutti, Perundumbai 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
Root -  Tap root, branched, woody, hard. stout, cylindrical, somewhat twisted, laterally flatte ned, measuring 7 to 14 
cm in diameter, variable in length, arising from the basal portion of the highly knotty crown, 8 to 20 cm in 
diameter; lateral braches about 10 to 12 cm in diameter; surface very rough, longitudinally wrinkled, fissured, bears 
long wiry, twisted lateral roots or scars left by them; at places exhi bits 10 to 12 cm wide circular to oval, tumor like 
protuberances; taste bitter, odour faint and not characteristic. 
 
Stem -  The older stems arising from the upper surface of the cylindrica l, crown stout, 3 to 4 cm in diameter, 
densely tomentose, exposing at places the inner hard whitish, longitudinall y striated wood; young stems 
cylindrical, faintly ridged and furrowed, densely tomentose, soft, axill ary and oppositely branched, internodes 3 to 
5 cm long and 0.8 to 1.5 cm in diameter, fracture outer fibrous, inner short, fractured surface exhibits central wide 
whitisth porous wood occupying the major portion of the  stem and outer ridge d tomentose margin; odour, very 
faint; taste, slightly bitter and astringent. 
 
Leaf -  Simple, opposite, oblong to lanceolate, 7 to 8 cm in length, 2 to 2.5 cm in brea dth, serrate to crenate, acute, 
reticulate, veins more prominent at lower side, arising from the ba se, both the surfaces are densely tomentose, base 
symmetrical; petiole densely pubescent, 1.5 to 4 cm in length and 2 to 4 mm in diameter, cylindrical and 
channelled on the upper side. 
 
b) Microsopic: 
 
Root -  TS circular, cork composed of 10 to 15 rows of tangentially elongated suberized cells, the outermost few 
layers being very deep brown in colour and at places not continous or ofte n getting disintegrated; cortex narrow 
consisting of 4 to 5 rows of parenchymatous cells, traversed by isola ted or small groups of spherical lignified thick 
walled stone cells; phloem comparatively wider, about 15 to 20 in rows, composed of phloem parenchyma, sieve 
tubes and companion cells; groups of stone cells of various sizes, shape s and thickness and oil canals often 
arranged in rows, especially in the inner region of the phloem; medull ary rays multiseriate, brownish, funnel 
shaped, in continuation with that of xylem, cells somewhat tangentially  elongated; xylem exhibits distinct growth 
rings and composed of vessels frequently containing yellowish brown tyl osis, thin walled tracheids, fibres and  CXCV  pitted parenchyma often encircling vessels; starch grains simpl e, rarely compound, oval to spherical, with distinct 
hilum, present throughout the parenchymatous cells of the xylem. 
 
Stem -  TS of the stem somewhat quadrangular, epidermis single layer, cov ered with thick cuticle, cells rectangular 
to squarish in shape, filled with some yellowish brown contents; simple , covering, 2 to 3 celled, uniseriate 
trichomes of adjacent cells, characteristically thickened spir ally, rarely branched, the basal cell often embedded 
with a few microsphenoidal crystals of calcium oxalate; glandular  trichomes, short, bearing uni to bi cellular stalk 
and circular bulging oval, cup shaped or mushroom shaped head; cortex collenchyma tous,2 to 4 in rows and 5 to 15 
under the ridge; endodermis distinct; pericycle exhibits discontinuous ri ng of thin walled groups of lignifed fibres; 
phloem very narrow, often getting obliterated; xylem consisting of r adially arranged oval to spherical vessels, 
pitted parenchyma, thin walled fibres and uni to biseriate medullary rays containing acicular crystals of calcium 
oxalate; pith parenchymatous and contains acicular crystals of calcium oxalate.  
 
Lea f- 
Petiole  – TS dorsiventrally flattened, with two prominent wing like projecti ons on the lateral sides; shows 
epidermis consisting of tangentially elongated cells filled wit h brownish content and covered with thick cuticle; 
trichomes similar to that of leaf and stem; underneath the epiderm is lies a band of collenchyma forming 3 to 10 
rows; a boat shaped meristele shows radially arranged xylem ves sels and narrow phloem almost encircling the 
xylem, the upper phloem tissue often exhibiting a few tangentially runni ng cavities; meristele lying under the wing 
is very small, hardly consisting of 2 or 3 rows of narrow xylem ve ssels encircled by narrow phloem; pericyclic 
region traversed with a few fibres; on the adaxial sides lies 2 to 4 rows of thick walled irregular parenchymatous 
cells; acicular crystals of calcium oxalate  present throughout  parenchymatous  tissue. 
 
Midrib  – TS passing through the midrib region shows highly pubescent upper and lower epidermis; cells filled with 
dark brownish contents, 12 to 15 rows of collenchymatous tissue beneath the uppe r epidermis and 2 to 6 rows 
above the lower epidermis; a discontinuous, radially arranged, deep arc  of centrally located meristele consisting of 
xylem, narrow phloem, uni- to bi-seriate medullary rays and a band of pe ricycle, occasionally traversed with 
isolated or groups of lignified fibres.   
           
Lamina - TS shows epidermal cells, tubular to rectangular in shape, with thic k striated cuticle, occasionally 
papillose; trichomes many, identical with that of stem but glandular trichomes ar e more in number; palisade tissues 
in a single row, discontinuous over the midrib, remaining mesophyll tiss ues consisting of 4 to 6 rows of spongy 
parenchyma containing acicular crystals of calcium oxalate; sma ll vascular bundles encircled by parenchymatous 
sheath traversed throughout the mesophyll tissue; upper and lower epiderm is in surface view shows stomata, 
diacytic and anisocytic, more on lower side; stomatal index 8 to 10 on uppe r side and 22 to 25 on lower side, 
palisade ratio 4 to 6 and veinislet number 4 to 7. 
 
Powder - Greenish brown, showing abundant trichomes of various sizes and shapes, thic k walled, coiled, 
multicellular; glandular trichomes with uni to bi- cellular stal k and spherical glistening head; fragments of long, 
unicellular, simple trichomes; isolated or groups of fibrous sclerei ds and stone cells varying in size, thickness and 
shapes, often exhibiting radiating, distinct connecting pits; starch gr ains simple and compound throughout and 
embedded in the parenchymatous cells; pitted, spiral and reticulate v essels of the vascular strands; epidermal cells 
of lamina in surface view with slightly sinous walls, containing diacytic and anisocytic stomata and sessile 
glandular trichomes of 4 to 8 celled head. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
Foreign matter  -       Not more than 2 per cent,    Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash   -       Not more than 7 per cent,    Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -       Not more than 2 per cent,    Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractvie -       Not less than   6 per cent,    Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive -       Not less than 11 per cent,    Appendix 2.2.7    CXCVI   
T.L.C. – 
 
T.L.C. of the alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate (0.2 mm thi ckness) using toluene: ethyl acetate  (6:4) 
shows spots at R f. 0.14, 0.43, 0.71 and 0.82 on spraying with vanillin sulphuric acid  reagent and heating the plate 
for about 10 minutes at 105 o.  
T.L.C. of the volatile oil on silica gel ‘G’ plate (0.2 mm thick)  using toluene:ethyl acetate  (93:7) shows 
spots at R f. 0.18, 0.25, 0.38, 0.62, 0.74 and 0.87 on spraying with vanillin sulphuric acid reagent  and heating the 
plate for about 10 minutes at 105 o. 
 
CONSTITUENTS – Triterpenic acid, betulinic acid, two diterpenoids viz., ovatodiolide and a nisomelic acid, 
aerial parts contain five 14 membered macrocylic diterpenes name ly anisomelode, β-sitosterol, malabaric acid, 2-
acetoxymalabaric acid, anisomelyl acetate and anisoelol; a terpe noid, anisomelin and a flavone 4, 5-dihydroxy-
3,6,7-trimethoxyflavone. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
Rasa      :  Tikta, Ka °u, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a        :  R ¦k¾a, Laghu, T ¤k¾´ a 
V¤¤¤¤rya     :  U ¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka       :  Ka °u 
Karma      :  V ¢tahara, Kaphahara, Var ´apras ¢dana, Anulomana, Lekhana, Vi ¾aghn ¤ 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS - Sahacar ¢di Taila, Bal ¢ Taila, Bal ¢dh ¢try ¢di Taila  
THERAPEUTIC USES -- --        Aºmar ¤ (Calculus), Ka ´² u (Itching), Kaphavik ¢ra (Disorders due to vitiation of Kapha 
dosa), Kāsa (Cough), Ko °ha (Ringworm / Impetigo / Erythema), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), Pi ²ak ¢ (Carbuncle), 
Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Śvāsa (Asthma), Vra ´a (Ulcer) 
 
DOSE- C¦r´a (Powder): 3 to 5 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
  CXCVII  SRUVAV §§ §§K½½ ½½A (Fruit) 
 
        Sruvav ¨k¾a    consists of fruits of Flacourtia indica  (Burm.f.) Merr. Syn. F. ramontchii   Herit. (Fam. 
Flacourtiaceae), a thorny small tree up to 8 m high bearing small , greenish – yellow flowers and small, red or dark 
brown, globose fruits. It is found in sub-montane areas of Punjab and Himac hal Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra, and 
southern peninsula. 
 
SYNONYMS –  Vika ¬kata, Gopaka ´°aª 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. :  Bincha, Bainchi-kul, Bainchaa 
Eng. :  Governors plum, Madagaskara plum, Mauritius plum 
Guj. :  Kankata, Kaankod  
Hin. :  Bilangra, Kakaiyaa, Kataai 
Kan. :  Lumanika, Dodda gejjalakai, Hunmunaki, Panumbus 
Mal. :  Vavankataku, Vikamkath, Yaliya nzerinigal 
Mar. :  Kaker, Bhekal 
Ori. :  Kantheikoli, Vaincha, Unicha 
Pun. :  Kanghu 
Tam. :  Sottaikala, Kat-ukala, Panampuvatti 
Tel. :  Putikatada, Putregu, Kanaveguchettu, Vikankata, Kandregu 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
 
a) Macroscopic : 
 
Fruit greyish green to reddish brown, rounded, lobed, 5 to 12 mm in diameter; cont aining up to 16 seeds in 
2 rows; seeds small, creamish, sometimes a few aborted; taste sharp and sweet , flavour agreeable. 
 
b)  Microscopic: 
 
Fruit-  A transverse section of fruit shows an outermost epidermal layer  of epicarp comprising small, thin walled, 
rounded cells occasionally bearing smooth, small, almost straight, ta pering, unicellular trichomes; bulk of the fruit 
tissue comprises of the many layered,  mesocarp made up of thin wal led parenchymatous cells interspersed 
abundantly with cavities filled with brown colouring matter or substa nce; endocarp lines the individual ovular 
loculi and comprises some layers of stone cells interspersed wit h long cells placed tangentially or obliquely to the 
cavity; cells of endocarp layer are relatively clear and t ransparent, some cells of this layer also contain prismatic 
crystals of calcium oxalate 15 to 25 µ in size.   
Seed-  The outer seed coat consists of a few layers of rounded cells; inne r integument consists of a single layer of 
squarish cells containing brown pigment; endosperm comprises of thin wal led, compactly arranged, rectangular, 
parenchymatous cells rich in starch. 
 
Powder –Dark brown, texture fine, taste slightly sour and odour flour like; mi croscopy shows unicellular 
trichomes upto 350 µ long, and stone cells upto 120 µ in size. 
  CXCVIII  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH  – 
 
Foreign matter              -   Not more than    1   per cent,     Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash               -   Not more than    5   per cent,     Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash              -   Not more than    2   per cent,     Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  -   Not more than  20   per cent,     Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  -   Not more than  21   per cent,     Appendix 2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. - 
  
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on silica gel ‘G’ F 254 plate using butanone: ethyl acetate: acetic 
acid: water  (3:5:1:1). On spraying the plate with NP/PEG reagent, under 366 nm shows  spots at R f. 0.28 (light 
yellow), 0.33 (white fluorescent), 0.57 (orange red) and 0.74 (green). 
 
CONSTITUENTS- Flacourside, methyl 6- O-(E)-p -coumaroyl glucopyranoside and 6- O-(E)-p -coumaroyl 
glucopyranose 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -  
Rasa : Madhura, Tikta   
Gu ´´ ´´a : T ¤k¾´a, Laghu, R ¦k¾a   
V¤¤¤¤rya :U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Kaphahara, M ¦trala, P ¢cana, Pittahara, R ¦cya, Vi ¾aghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug 
  
THERAPEUTIC USES - Agnim āndya (Digestive impairment), K āmal ā (Jaundice), Pl ¤h¢v¨ddhi 
(Splenomegaly), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Raktavik ¢ra (Disorders of blood), ¹otha 
(Inflammation), Yak ¨droga (Diseases of liver) 
  
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 5 to 10 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CXCIX  STH ¥¥ ¥¥LAIL¡¡ ¡¡ (Fruit) 
 
 Sth ¦lail ¢ is the dried fruits of Amomum subulatum Roxb. (Fam. Zingiberaceae), a perennial rhizomatous 
herb upto a height of 1.5 to 2 m growing in West Bengal, Sikkim and Assam Hills. 
 
SYNONMYS –  B ¨hadel ¢, B ¨hat el ¢, Bhadrail ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. :  Bara elachi, Baara aliachi, Bad elaach 
Eng. :  The Greater Cardamom 
Guj. :  Mothi elichi, Moto-elachi 
Hin. :  Baraa-elaachi, Badi ilaayachi 
Kan. :  Dodda yalakki 
Mal. :  Valiya elam, Perelam, Peri-elav 
Mar. :  Mothe elaayachi, Moteveldode 
Ori. :  Badaa alaicha, Alaicha 
Pun. :  Budi eleichi 
Tam. :  Periya elam 
Tel. :  Peddayelaki, Pedda elakulu  
Urd. :  Ilaayachi badi, Heel kalan 
       
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
 Fruits are indehiscent capsules, dark brown with occasional pink ting e; ovate - elliptic, 1 to 3 cm long and 
1 to 2 cm broad, slightly three angular and three loculed; each locule wit h a ragged membraneous septum; fruit rind 
coarsely striated; each fruit bears 20 to 70 seeds held in a visc id pulpy mass; seeds ovate - elliptic and angular, 
brownish black, 2 to 4 mm long and 2 to 3 mm broad in size; membraneous ari l present; aromatic and strongly 
pungent with a camphoraceous taste. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Fruit-  Pericarp consists of a single layer of epidermis formed by tan gentially elongated cells with brownish oil 
droplets; mesocarpic tissue consists of thin walled parenchymatous c ells, both isodiametric and tangentially 
elongated, more compact towards the endocarpic region; many fibro-vas cular bundles present in a row in the 
mesocarp. 
 
Seed-  Shows a somewhat triangular outline; outer layer of the testa i s with a single row of thick walled, compact 
and radially elongated cells followed by perisperm tissue composed of  10 to 15 layers of radially elongated 
parenchyma cells packed with many simple, small, mostly globular starch grains and tiny rosettes of calcium 
oxalate crystals; endosperm cells parenchymatous, usually 8 to 10 layered. 
 
Powder- Dark brown, microscopic observation shows a patch of elongated rectangul ar parenchyma; perisperm 
cells packed with starch grains; polyhedral starch grains and ros ettes of calcium oxalate crystals of about 5 µ  CC across; irregular, thick walled stone cells with very narrow lume n, size 20 to 105 µ; brownish resin masses; narrow 
elongated fibres;  spiral, reticulate and pitted vessels. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Foreign matter  -   Not more than   2   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash    -   Not more than   7   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -   Not more than   2   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  -   Not less than     6   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  -   Not less than   18   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7  
Volatile oil     -   Not less than     1   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.10 
 
T.L.C.- 
 
   T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plat e (0.2 mm thickness) using hexane:ethyl 
acetate  (8:2) after spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and heating at 105 o for 5 minutes  shows 
spots at   R f. 0.44 (pink), 0.52 (pink), 0.6 (light pink), 0.67 (brown), 0.72 (pink) and 0.78 (light brown). 
 
CONSTITUENTS-  Volatile oil predominantly containing cineol with other constituents such as α-pinene, β-
pinene, sabinene, myrcene, α-terpinene, β-terpinene, limonene, p-cymene, terpinenol, α-terpineol, δ-terpineol and 
nerolidol. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION- 
 
Rasa : Tikta, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma 
 : Anulomana, D ¤pana, H ¨dya, Kaphahara, M ¦trala, Pittas ¢raka,   
  ¹ira ªºodhaka, V ¢tahara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS-  Ela Arka Gunah, Bhadra Arka Gunah, Sthula Ela Guna, Sthulela 
Guna  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES-  Aruci (Tastelessness), Bastivik ¢ra, Chardi (Emesis), Dantaroga (Disease of 
tooth), H ¨ll ¢sa (Nausea), Ka ´² u (Itching), Ka ´°haroga (Disease of throat), K āsa (Cough), Mukharoga 
(Disease of mouth), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), Raktavik ¢ra (Disorders of blood), ¹iroroga (Disease of 
head), Śū la (Pain / colic), Śvāsa (Asthma), T ¨¾¢ (Thirst),  Tvakroga ( Skin diseases, Vi ¾avik ¢ra (Disorders 
due to poison), Vra ´a (Ulcer) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 1 to 3 g. 
 
    
    
    
     CCI  ¹¹ ¹¹UKAN ¡¡ ¡¡S¡¡ ¡¡ (Rhizome)  
 
 ¹ukan ¢s¢ consists of the rhizomes of Corallocarpus epigaeus Benth. ex Hook. f. Syn. Bryonia epigaea 
Rottler; Rhyncocarpa epigaea Naud and Aechmandra epigaea Arn. (Fam. Cucurbitaceae), a monoecious tendril 
climber, found in the scrub jungles of South India along hilly tracts. 
 
SYNONYMS -  N ¢hikanda, Ka °un ¢h¤, N ¢hik ¢, ¡k¢ºagaru ²a 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Guj. :  Kadvinai, Naahikand 
Hin. :  Mirchiakand, Kirakanda, Kadvi naahi, Naahi Kand 
Kan. :  Akasha garudagadde 
Mal. :  Kollamkova kizhang 
Mar. :  Karunai, Kadavinai, Akashagarudi 
Tam. :  Karutankilanku 
Tel. :  Murudonda, Nagadonda 
 
DESCRIPTION -  
 
a)   Macroscopic: 
 
 Whole tubers napiform, upto 5 cm in diameter, cut p ieces 1 to 2 cm in length and 1.5 to 3.5 cm in diameter, 
brownish yellow; skin very thin and closely intact; cut surface y ellowish white; fracture, short, starchy; taste, 
bitter. 
b) Microscopic:  
Rhizome - Cork made up of 8 to 10 rows of cells, of which th e outermost 3 or 4 layers are tangentially elongated, 
thick walled cells and inner few layers radially arranged and thin walled; rest of the ground tissue of parenchyma 
cells contain simple starch grains measuring about 10 to 20 µ in diameter and compound starch grains with 2 to 4 
components; xylem composed of isolated strands embe dded in the ground tissue, including a large solita ry and 
wide vessels present in radial multiples of two or three, phloem scattered in the ground tissue particu larly 
towards inside of the xylem strands. 
 
Powder - Yellowish white, taste very bitter; tissue debris w ith thick walled cork cells in surface view, compound 
starch grains, simple starch grains, fibres and vess els observed. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
Foreign matter - Not more than    2     per cent,  Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash - Not more than   4.5     per cent,    Appendix  2. 2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash - Note more than  1.0    per cent,     Appendix  2. 2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive - Not less than      5     per cent,   Appendix  2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive - Not less than    14      per cent,    Appendix  2 .2.7 
Fixed oil - Not less than     1     per cent,  Appendix  2.2.8 
  CCII  T.L.C. – 
T.L.C. of chloroform extract on aluminium plate pre coated with silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  (0.2 mm thickness) using 
toluene: methanol  (7:1) under UV 366 nm shows fluorescent spots at R f. 0.14, 0.19 and 0.46 (all blue), 0.69 (fluorescent  
blue), 0.74, 0.80, 0.89 (all blue). Under UV 254 nm   spots appear at R f. 0.11, 0.24, 0.31, 0.37 and 0.63 (all green), 0.69 
(pale blue), 0.80 (green), on dipping the plate in vanillin-sulphuric acid  and heating at 105 o for 5 minutes spots 
appear at R f. 0.14, 0.2, 0.26 and 0.34  (all pale brown) 0.63 and 0.74 (both grey). 
CONSTITUENTS - Bryonin; epigaeusyl ester; corallocarpuscalarolide; corallocarpenoyl                               
ester; dotriacont-22,25-diol-10-one. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
¹¹ ¹¹VET PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
Rasa : Ka °u, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, R ¦k¾a, T ¤k¾´a 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : ¹othahara, Vamana, Virecana, Vi ¾aghna 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- K¢ºmary ¢di gh ¨ta 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - ¡mavata (Rheumatism), Aruci (Tastelessness), Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), D ¢ha 
(Burning sensation), Hikk ¢ (Hiccup), J ¤r´a ¡ntra ºotha(Chronic intestinal pain), J ¤r´ajvara (Chronic 
fever), Jvara (Fever);  K ¢sa (Cough), K ¨mi roga (Worm infestation), Prav ¢hik ¢ (Dysentery), Sarpa vi ¾a 
(Snake poison), ¹otha (Inflammation), ¹v¢sa (Asthma), V ¢takapha Jvara (Fever due to Vata Kapha);  
Vispho °aka (Blisterous eruption), Vra ´a (Ulcer), Yoni roga (Disease of female genital tract) 
 
DOSE -  C ¦r´a (Powder): 3 to  5 g  CCIII  AVETASA (Leaf) 
 
¹veta vetasa  consists of dried leaves of  Salix alba  L (Fam. Salicaceae), a large tree with olive green, purple 
or yellow branches cultivated in Western Himalayas. The plant is not found to grow wil dly in India.   
 
SYNONYMS -¹veta veda mu ºka 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
Eng. : European willow, White willow 
Hin.                     : Sveta veda muska 
Kan. 
Mar. 
Pun. 
Urd. : Neerganjimara 
: Pandra veda muska 
: Bis, Malchang, Bhushan, Madnu 
: Bed  Sada  
DESCRIPTION – 
a)  Macroscopic: 
 Leaves 6.3 to 10 cm long, lanceolate, broadest at a little above the middle, pinnately veined, apex acute 
and margin minutely serrated, silvery when young, glaucous beneath; pet iole 7.5 to 12.5 mm long; odour and taste 
nil. 
b) Microscopic:  
Petiole  -TS of the petiole irregular in outline with ‘V’ shaped groove on the upper side; stele centrally located and 
bicollateral; epidermis single layered covered by a thick cuti cle and a few trichomes  upto 108 µ long, followed by 
10 to 15 rows of collenchyma; collenchyma on the adaxial side of the peti ole  followed by 10 to 12 rows of 
parenchyma, parenchyma tissue absent on the abaxial side of the petiole ; vascular bundle consisting of xylem and 
phloem; idioblasts present throughout the ground tissue, filled with rosett e crystals and a few prismatic crystals of 
calcium oxalate. 
Midrib  -TS of leaf passing through the midrib more convex on the abaxial side a nd almost flat on the adaxial side; 
upper epidermis single layered, lower epidermis two layered; a c uticle is present; a few epidermal cells filled with 
light pink pigment; a few unicellular long trichomes present; epide rmis followed by 5 or 6 rows of collenchyma, 5 
or 6 rows of parenchyma with a few cells filled with rosette c rystals of calcium oxalate; midrib shows a centrally 
located bicollateral stele, surrounded by patches of pericyclic fibr es; vascular bundle consists of a xylem and 
phloem; pericycle made up of fibres.  
Lamina -Lamina isobilateral; trichomes 45 to 108 µ long; upper epidermis singl e layered whereas lower two 
layered, made up of barrel shaped cells; two layers of palisade c ells present adjacent to both upper and lower 
epidermis; 2 or 3 layers of spongy cells in the central region; a  few cells of the mesophyll are filled with rosette and 
prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; vascular bundles of the veins are s een; average stomatal index 5 to 7 and 8 to 
11 on upper and lower surface respectively; palisade ratio 6 to 11 on both surfaces. 
Powder - Greyish green, taste and odour nil; exhibits upper epidermis made up of s traight anticlinal walls and 
devoid of stomata; lower epidermis made up of straight anticlinal walls covered by paracytic stomata, cicatrices 
and trichomes, fragments of lamina in sectional view, trichomes t wo celled long with a small basal cell and a long 
apical cell with smooth walls; rosette and prismatic crystals of calcium  oxalate.  
  CCIV   IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
Foreign matter  -  Not more than     2      per cent,   Appendix    2.2.2 
Total ash   - Not more than   10.5   per cent,   Appendix    2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -  Not more than   0.6     per cent,   Appendix    2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive -   Not less than     11      per cent,   Appendix    2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than     66      per cent,   Appendix    2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
  Take 2 g of the powdered drug and extract with methanol (2 x 25 ml), by refluxing on a water bath. Filter 
and concentrate the pooled extract. Adjust the volume to 10 ml with ethanol  and apply about 20 µl on precoated 
silica gel 60 F 254  plate. 
 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on aluminium plate prec oated with silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  (0.2 mm thickness) using 
toluene:ethyl acetate:formic acid: methanol  (3:3:0.8:0.2), with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  followed by 
heating at 105 o for 5 min shows spots at R f. 0.13 (yellow), 0.36 (light violet), 0.47 (light brown), 0.52 (light 
yellow), 0.65 (greenish grey), 0.76 (blue) and 0.86 (purple). 
 
CONSTITUENTS – Amentoflavone, apigenin, (+)-catechin, (+)-gallocatechin, isoquercetri n, rutin, narcissin, 
isorhamnetin-3- O-β-D-glucoside, salicin, fragilin, salicortin.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa                  : Tikta, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a                 : Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya                : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka              : Ka °u 
Karma              : Gr ¢h¤, Jvaraghna, Kaphahara, M ¦trala, Rak ¾oghna,    
                            Vedan ¢sth ¢pana, Vra ´a ¹odhana 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug 
THERAPEUTIC USES-   Amav ¢ta (Rheumatism), ¹vitra (Leucoderma / Vitiligo), Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), 
Kāmal ā (Jaundice), Kar ´aroga (Disease of ear), Prav ¢hik ¢ (Dysentery), Rakta ¾°hivana (Haemoptysis), 
Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), V ¢tarakta (Gout) 
 
DOSE-    C¦r´a (Powder): 3 to 6 g 
                Ka ¾¢ ya (Decoction): 50 to 100 ml 
 
 
 
  CCV TAKKOLA (Fruit) 
          Takkola consists of fruits  of Illicium verum  Hook. f. (Fam. Magnoliaceae), an evergreen shrub or tree 
attaining a height of 8 to 15 m and diameter of 25 cm. The plant is a native of China a nd is sometimes cultivated in 
India. Most of the drug available in the market is imported. 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass. :   Baadiyaane khataai 
Eng. :   Star Anise of China 
Hin. :   Ansafal 
Mal. :   Takkolpputtil 
Mar. :    Baadiyaan 
Tam. :    Anushappu, Anushuppu, Annashuppu 
Tel. :    Anasapuveru  
Urd. :    Baadiyaan khataai 
 
DESCRIPTION –  
 
a) Macroscopic : 
 
 Fruits star shaped, consisting of 8 carpels (follicles) arranged in a whorl around a short central column 
attached to a pedicel; each follicle 12 to 17 mm long, up to 14 mm deep, up to 5 mm broad, boat shaped, bluntly 
beaked at the apex, woody and wrinkled, reddish brown outside, smooth glossy inside, opening by ve ntral suture at 
the upper margin, containing one seed. Pedicel up to 5 cm long, strongly cur ved at the distal end; seeds reddish 
brown, compressed-ovoid, smooth, shiny with brittle seed coat enclosing a s oft, oily kernel; odour, pleasant, 
resembling that of anise; taste, agreeable, aromatic, sweet.  
 
 b) Microscopic: 
 TS of the follicle shows an outer most single layered epicarp of flattened, nearly rectangular cells; 
mesocarp consists of parenchymatous, many layered, spongy tissue compose d of irregular cells with brownish 
walls and containing frequent cavities, patches of sclerenchyma, occ asional vascular strands surrounded by 
sclerenchyma and prismatic crystals; endocarp composed of a layer  of columnar, transluscent or clear cells 
containing scattered, occasional prismatic crystals; seed shows testa with an outer epidermal layer made up of 
sclereids; inner layer of seed coat consists of thick walled, br own-pigmented cells; endosperm composed of thin 
walled parenchyma cells contain food reserves. 
 
Powder– Dark brown, coarse, odour anise like; taste slightly tingling, powder  microscopy shows  groups of clear, 
thin walled, columnar cells 200 to 220 µ long from endocarp, and  fragments of seed coat comprising sclereids  of 
100 to 130 µ in size in surface and side views; compiles with the following colour tests:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCVI  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
Identification :-  
 
1) Take a few mg of powder, add about 5ml of 5% KOH and boil for 2 minute s, cool and dilute to 10 ml 
with water: a blood red colour is produced. 
 
2) Take powder of fruits without seeds, add a few ml of ethanol and boil  for 2 minutes; cool, filter and 
add 25 ml water to filterate; extract with 10 ml petroleum ether ; evaporate the petroleum ether layer to 
dryness; dissolve the residue in 2 ml acetic acid, add small quanti ty of ferric chloride and shake well, 
add sulphuric acid slowly along the tube wall: brown colour is produced at the junction of the two 
liquids.  
 
Foreign matter    - Not more than 2 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash     -  Not more than 4 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash    -  Not more than 2 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive   -  Not less than 13 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive   -  Not less than 21 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7 
Essential oil contents    -  Not less than   3 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.8 
 
T.L.C- 
 T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug is developed on silica gel ‘ G’ 60 F 254  plate using  chloroform: 
methanol:acetic acid  (8:2:0.25) shows spots at R f. 0.12 (dark green), 0.27 (green), 0.33 (bluish grey), 0.40 (grey) 
and 0.50 (grey) on spraying the plate with anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid reagent  and heating the plate for 15 
minutes at 105 o. 
  
CONSTITUENTS - Essential oils, flavonol glycosides, and veranisatins A, B & C. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TIN 
DU 
KA 
(Fru 
it) 
 
Tind 
uka 
cons 
ists 
of unripe and ripe fruits of  Diospyros peregrina  Gurke Syn. 
 Diospyros embryopteris  L. (Fam. Ebenaceae), a medium sized tree having alternate lea ves and ellipsoid or sub-
globose, green or light brown fruits possessing prominent, persistent, woody  calyx. The tree is distributed 
throughout India. 
 
SYNONYMS - Viral ¢, Asitak ¢raskara, K ¢laskandha, Sph ¦rjaka 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION -  
Rasa         : Madhura, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a        : Laghu, Snigdha, T ¤k¾´ a 
V¤¤¤¤rya        : U¾´ a  
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka      : Madhura 
Karma      : 
 Kaphahara, D ¤pana, P ¢cana, V ¢t¢nulomana, 
M¦trala, V ¢taghna, Ko ¾tªav ¢ta - º amana, Vedan ¢hara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Karpur ¢di C ¦r´a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - ¡ dhm āna (Flatulance with gurgling sound), Aruci (Tastelessness), Gulma 
(Abdominal lump), Mukhadurgandha (Halitosis), Sandhivata (Arthritis), Śū la (Pain / Colic) 
 
DOSE- C¦r´a (Powder): 250 to 625 mg.   CCVII  REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass. :  Kendu 
Ben. :  Gab 
Eng. :  Indian Gaub, Persimon 
Guj. :  Timbaravo, Temru 
Hin. :  Tendu, Gaabh, Maakaatendu 
Kan. :  Holetupare, Kusharta 
Mal. :  Panachi, Panachchi, Pananchi 
Mar. :  Temburni 
Ori. :  Kendu 
Tam. :  Kattatti, Kavikattai, Tumbi, Paanicikaa, Tumbika 
Tel. :  Tumiki, Gaara 
Urd. :  Tendu 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
a)  Macroscopic:  
 
Fruit globose, ovoid or ellipsoid berry, 3.5 to 5 cm   in width, with a much large and thickened, often woody 
calyx; cuticle thick and shiny; green when unripe, yellowish orange w hen ripe; nearly smooth or covered with a 
rusty mealiness; fleshy and possessing a viscid, glutinous pulp when f resh, hard when dried, 6 to 10 celled; both 
unripe and ripe fruits cut longitudinally in to 3 to 4 pieces along with persistent calyx and dried for use; seed 
solitary in each cell, thin, flat, and oblong; testa hard, separable; endosperm prominent.  
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Fruit  -TS through the fruit shows a thick, stratified cuticle supported on a many-layered exocarp; outermost layer 
of small, rectangular or rounded cells forms the epidermis; hypoderm al region of exocarp possesses abundant 
groups of stone cells mixed with parenchymatous patches; mesocarp const itutes many layers of parenchymatous 
cells possessing abundant, large cavities having reddish brown colouring  matter; innermost layer of pericarp lined 
with the cuticle and constituting the endocarp. 
 Seed  -Testa, thick, many layered and lined externally by cuticle; outermost layer of s quarish or angular, thick cells 
forms the outer epidermis of testa; many layers of parenchymatous , sub epidermal zone contain abundant brown 
colouring matter; innermost layer of testa consists of thin wall ed, parenchymatous cells; endosperm prominent and 
cartilaginous with cells having very thick, wavy or straight walls.  
 
Powder - Dull brick red, coarse and granular; taste and odour not distinct; microscopy shows abundant s tone cells 
60 to 120 µ in size and cells of cartilaginous endosperm.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH –  
 
Foreign matter     -    Not more than   2    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash      -    Not more than   6    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash     -    Not more than   2    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive    -    Not less than   10    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive    -    Not less than   16    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.7 
  CCVIII  T.L.C. – 
 
 T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on silica gel ‘G’ F 254  plate using ethyl acetate: n-hexane  (7:3).On 
spraying the plate with anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid reagent  and heating the plate for 10 minutes at 105º, spots 
appear at R f. 0.41 (light blue) 0.49 (brownish zone) 0.61 (bluish) and 0.83 (dark blue). 
 
CONSTITUENTS-   Alkanes and triterpenoids. Seed contains hexacosane and β-sitosterol, β-sitosterol 
glucoside, gallic acid and betulinic acid. Fatty oil (32%), unsaponified matter and β-amyrin. 
 
 
DOS 
E -   
Pakv 
a 
phal 
a 
(Rip 
e)- 
C¦r´
a 
(Po 
wder 
): 5 
to 10 
g.                                     
 Apakva phala (Unripe) 
 
 
 
TR ¡¡ ¡¡    PROPERTIES AND ACTION -  
   Pakva phala    Apakva phala  
Rasa :  Madhura   Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a :  Guru, Snigdha  Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  S ¤ta    S ¤ta   
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka :  Madhura   Ka °u 
Karma :  Pittahara, Kaphahara V ¢taprakopaka, Gr ¢h¤, 
   Durjara, Pu ¾°ikara   Lekhana  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS –  Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - 
 Pakva phala- ¡smar ¤ (Calculus), Aruci (Tastelessness), Kapharoga 
(Disease due to Kapha dosa), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), Raktado ¾a 
(Disorders of blood) 
 Apakva phala-  Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), Bhagna (Fractures), D ¢ha (Burning 
sensation), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of skin), ¹otha (Oedema), 
Medoroga (Obesity), Prav ¢hik ¢ (Dysentery), Raktapitta (Bleeding 
disorder), Udarda (Urticaria), Vra ´a (Ulcer)  CCIX  YAM ¡³¡ ¡³¡ ¡³¡ ¡³¡  (Rhizome) 
           Tr ¢yam ¢´¢  consists of dried rhizomes of Gentiana kurroo Royle (Fam. Gentianaceae), a perennial herb with 
tufted and decumbent stem distributed sporadically in sub-alpine to alpi ne meadows between altitudes of 1500 to 
3000 m. 
 
SYNONYMS - Tr ¢yanti, Girij ¢, Adris ¢nuj, Balabhadr ¢, P ¢lanik ¢, Tr ¢yantik ¢ 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
Eng.       :   Indian gentian  
Guj.       :   Traymana  
Hin.       :   Trayman, Kadu  
Kan.       :   Karadihanni  
Mal.       :   Trayamana  
Pun.       :   Kadu  
Tam.       :   Kampanitirai  
Tel.       :   Trayama 
DESCRIPTION- 
a) Macroscopic:  
                   Dried rhizome pieces cylindrical to quadrangular, upto 12 cm long, 0.8 cm t hick, dark brown with 
yellowish-white patches of exfoliated bark and marked by closely a rranged transverse annulations and a few scars 
of rootlets; fracture, short and brittle; odour, characteristically aromatic ; taste, bitter.   
b) Microscopic:   
               TS of rhizome shows thin cork of tangentially elongated cells, 2 or 3 layered cork cambium of polygonal 
cells; multilayered cortex of oval to round cells; phloem 2 to 3 la yered; cambium present and xylem largely 
composed of vessels arranged in radial rows or single; broad squaris h pith region of large circular cells extend from 
corners into intervascular regions; cells of cortex and pith fille d with resinous mass and broad acicular crystals of 
calcium oxalate.  
Powder- Light brown, shows fragments of round to elongated polygonal or oval parenchy matous cells of cortex 
and pith containing globules of resinous mass and broad acicular crystals of calcium  oxalate; reticulately thickened 
vessels; yellowish-brown cork cells filled with brown granular m aterial; abundant brownish coloured mycorrhizal 
hyphae may occur in association with cortex cells.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
Foreign matter   - Not more than 2 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2  
Total ash   - Not more than 7 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash  - Not more than 2 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive - Not less than 28 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive - Not less than 13 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7  
T.L.C.- 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract of the drug on precoated silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  (0.2 mm thickness) using toluene 
:ethyl acetate  (90:10) shows spots at R f.0.13 (light violet), 0.20 (violet), 0.28 (light violet), 0.34 (brick red), 0.40 
(violet), 0.50 (magenta), 0.55 (pink), 0.63 (violet), 0.78 (dark pink) and 0.96 (dark pink) on spraying with 
anisaldehyde-sulphuric acid reagent  followed by heating at 105º for 10 minutes.   CCX CONSTITUENTS - Gentianic acid. 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
Rasa  :  Tikta, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a  :  Sara  
V¤¤¤¤rya  :  U ¾´ a  
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka  :  Ka °u 
Karma  :  Pittahara, Kaphahara, Vi ¾aghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Tr ¢yam ¢´¢ dya Gh ¨ta, Ca Ci. 5, Trayamana Guna, Trayanti Guna, 
Trayamana Kvatha, Mah ¢pai º¢ cika Gh ¨ta, Ca Ci. 9 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), Bhrama (Vertigo), Gulma (Abdominal lump), H ¨droga (Heart 
disease), Jvara (Fever), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), Raktav ¤k¢ra (Disorders of blood), Śū la (Pain / Colic), 
Sutika º¦ la (Postpartum abdominal pain), T ¨¾´ā (Thirst), Visama & Paittika, Visarpa (Erysepales) 
DOSE- C¦r´a (Powder): 1 to 3 g. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   CCXI  TRIPAK ½½ ½½££££ (Whole Plant) 
 
 Tripak ¾¤ consists of the whole plant of Coldenia procumbens L. (Fam. Boraginaceae), a 
procumbent herb with trailing stems appressed to th e ground and rooting all along; found wild in fallo w 
fields, dried up lakes and roadsides in warmer part s of India.  
 
SYNONYMS -  Tripu ¼kh ¤ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES-  
 
Eng. :  Trailing coldenia 
Guj. :  Basriookharad 
Hin. :  Tripunkhi 
Kan. :  Tripakshi 
Mal. :  Cherupadi 
Mar. :  Tripakshi, Tripunkhi 
Ori. :  Gondri lota 
Tam. :  Ceruppatai  
Tel. :  Hamsapadu, Chepputhatteku 
 
DESCRIPTION –  
 
a) Macroscopic: 
Root  -Taproot well developed, creamy white, length vari able, thickness upto 1.5 cm, rootlets present, no 
characteristic odour and taste. 
 
Stem  -Stem procumbent, numerous branches radiating from  the root reaching upto 40 cm long, shaggy, 
with appressed silky white hairs, especially on you nger branches, bitter, no odour. 
 
Leaf  -Leaves ashy green on upper surface, lower surface  greenish, crisped, shortly petiolate, obovate to 
oblong, crenate, pubescent, no odour and taste.   
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Root -Cork and outer cortex crushed, scattered sclerenchym atous patches present in the inner cortex; phloem 
present; cambium distinct; xylem consists of scattered, so litary circular vessels; xylem parenchyma lignified; 
uniseriate ray radiating from the centre. 
 
Stem  -Epidermis single layer of tabular cells, with an occasional much larger cell; thick walled unicellular tr ichomes, 
200 to 400 µ in length present; cortex consists of about two layers of hypodermal chl orenchyma followed by about 
four layers of collenchyma and inner layers of circular parenchyma ; pericycle present with small patches of lignified 
fibres; stele consists of scattered xylem vessels, with layers of phloem cells at the periphery; occas sional phloem 
fibres seen; medullary rays uniseriate; pith large and parenchymatous with intercellular spaces and shows s tarch 
grains and druses. 
 
Leaf - 
  CCXII  Petiole -Almost circular in outline; epidermal cells single  layered with trichomes and a few empty idioblasts;  
one or 2 rows of chlorenchyma follows epidermis; ground tis sue parenchymatous. 
 
Midrib -Shows a slight convex curvature on the adaxial fac e and a deeper curvature on the abaxial face; 
epidermis single layered with unicellular trichomes upt o 400 µ in length; the sub epidermal layers composed 
of 1 or 2 rows of collenchyma; collateral crescent shaped median vascula r strands with two smaller bundles present 
on the adaxial side; ground tissue parenchymatous; druses present. 
 
Lamina -Dorsiventral; epidermis single layer with a few empty idioblasts; stomata anomocytic; adaxial and 
abaxial epidermal cells polygonal with straight wall s in surface view; palisade two layered, second layer with 
shorter cells; stomatal number 48 to 52 / mm 2 for abaxial surface; 40 to 46 / mm 2 on adaxial surface; stomatal index 
2 or 3 on both adaxial and abaxial epidermis; pa lisade ratio 9 to 11; vein islet number 10 to 12; v einlet 
termination number 15 to 18. 
 
Powder - Ashy green, numerous thick walled unicellular trich omes, fragments of leaf with anomocytic 
stomata, fibres, occasional druses observed vessels  scalariform. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
 
Foreign matter                                -  Not more than   1  percent,  Appendix  2.2.2  
Total ash  -  Not more than  13  percent,  Appendix  2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash  -  Not more than    2  percent,  Appendix  2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive  -  Not less than    10  percent,  Appendix  2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive  -  Not less than    17  percent,  Appendix  2.2.7  
Fixed oil  -  Not less than      3  percent,  Appendix  2.2.8 
 
T.L.C. - 
 
T.L.C of chroloform extract on aluminium plate prec oated with silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254   (0.2 mm 
thickness) using toluene: ethyl acetate ( 6:1 ) and 6 drops of formic acid, under UV 366 nm shows  fluorescent 
zones at R f 0.10, 0.16, (both white), 0.38 (pink), 0.50 (magent a), 0.56 (white), 0.60 (pink), 0.67 (magenta) 0.73,  
(deep violet) and  0.83 (white). On exposure to iodine vapours  spots appear at R f. 0.16, 0.31 (both yellowish 
brown), 0.38 (greenish yellow), 0.50, 0.56 (both ye llowish brown), 0.60 (greenish yellow) 0.67 and 0.7 0 (both 
yellowish brown. On dipping the plate in vanillin-sulphuric acid reagent  and heating at 105° for 5 minutes,  
spots appear at R f 0.13 (violet), 0.20 (yellow), 0.25 (violet), 0.27,  0.40 (both yellow), 0.44 (green), 0.50, 0.53 
(both violet), 0.63 (yellow), 0.67 (green) and 0.70  (violet).  
 
CONSTITUENTS -   Steroid glycosides. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa :  Tikta, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a :  Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka :  Ka °u 
Karma :  Kaphaghna, P ¢cana, ¹othaghna, V ¢tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug  
  CCXIII  THERAPEUTIC USES-  ¡mav ¢ta (Rheumatism), Vidradhi (Abscess)  
DOSE – C¦r´a (Powder) : 3 to  6 g 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXIV  TUVARAKA     (Seed) 
 
Tuvaraka consists of the dried seeds of Hydnocarpus pentandra (Buch.-Ham.) Oken Syn. H. laurifolia  
(Dennst.) Sleummer., H. wightiana  Blume (Fam. Flacourtiaceae), a deciduous evergreen tree upto 15 m or more,  
endemic to tropical forests of Western Ghats, upto 600 m. 
 
SYNONYMS  - Ka °ukapittha 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. :   Chaulmugraa 
Eng. :   Chaulmugra 
Hin. :   Chaalmograa 
Kan. :   Garudphala, Toratti, Suranti 
Mal. :   Kodi, Vrikshamroti, Marotti 
Mar. :   Kadukavatha 
Tam. :   Nirati Muthu  
Tel. :   Nirudu, Niridi 
Urd. :   Chaalmagraa 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
 
a) Macroscopic:  
 
Seeds obtusely angular, elongate - obovate, dark brown, 8 to15 mm in width a nd 12 to 28 mm in length; 
testa longitudinally ridged and stony; cotyledons two, thin, papery; endosper m, abundant and oily; odour, 
indistinct; taste, acidic.  
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
TS through micropylar region of the seed shows seed coat, endosperm and e mbryo; the seed coat has outer 
testa made up of three types of cells: (i) an outer parenchymatous  epidermis with  vascular supply, with a few  
sclereids present around  xylem; ii) a middle sclerotic tissue of  cells with  four  distinct zones , a few outer layers 
of isodiametric sclerotic cells upto 30 µ diameter, with thick walls and simple pits, followed by radially  elongated 
thick walled cell; a middle uniseriate, ribbon shaped thick walled sclereids elongated up to 900 µ; a few  layers of 
tangentially elongated sclereids; (iii) an inner multiseriate  epidermal  layer with thin walled isodiametric,compactly 
arranged cells; tegmen is undifferentiated and is almost crushed by the endosperm; endosperm consists of 
compactly arranged isodiametric thinwalled parenchymatous cells,   filled with oil globules and abundant rosettes 
of calcium oxalate prisms of 15 to 20 µ; cotyledons two, possess single layer of epidermal cells with br ick shaped 
cells; mesophyll   undifferentiated. 
   
Powder - Coarse, oily, brownish; shows thin walled polygonal cells of epidermi s, polygonal thin walled cells of 
endosperm with rosettes of calcium oxalate crystals of 25 to 30 µ; isodiametric sclereids with simple pits forming 
unbranched radiating canals measuring from 20 to 28 µ in diameter, laterally compressed sclereids measuring 300 
to 900 µ long and 20 to 30 µ wide, fibrous tissue and xylem elements with annular and spiral thickenings. 
  CCXV  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
Foreign matter               -  Not more than    2     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash              -  Not more than    4     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash   -  Not more than    1     per cent,  Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive      -  Not less than    35     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive        -  Not less than    12     per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7 
 
 T.L.C  - 
 
T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on silica gel ‘G’ plate using n-hexane:ethyl acetate  (9:1) under UV 366 nm 
shows fluorescent spots at R f. 0.15 (blue), 0.48 (green) and 0.83 (blue), on exposure to iodine vapour spots appear 
at R f. values, 0.15, 0.25, 0.36, 0.48, 0.83 and 0.92(all yellow), and on spraying with 5% methanolic sulphuric acid 
reagent  and heating the plate for 10 minutes at 105 °  spots appear at R f. 0.15, 0.25, 0.48 and 0.83.  
 
CONSTITUENTS-  Epegenin, hydnocarpin, isohydnocarpine methoxyhydnocarpin and   
                                  fixed oils.   
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -  
Rasa :  Tikta, Madhura, Ka ¾¢ ya  
Gu ´´ ´´a :  Snigdha, T ¤k¾´ a 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  U ¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka :  Ka °u 
Karma 
 :  V ¢tahara, Kaphahara, Ras ¢yana, Ubhayatobh ¢gahara 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS -- --    Tuvaraka Taila, Tuvarak Guna, Tuvaraka Taila Rasayana, Tuvaraka 
Tailah   
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- ¡n¢ha (Distension of abdomen due to obstruction to passage of urine and 
stools), Ar śa (Piles), G ¨dhras ¤ (Sciatica), Ga ´² am ¢l¢ (Cervical lymphadenitis), Gulma (Abdominal lump), 
Jvara (Fever), Ka ´² u (Itching), Kaphavataja roga (Disorders due to Kapha & Vata dosa) , Kr /uniF023mi 
(Helminthiasis), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of skin), ¹otha (Oedema), Prameha (Metabolic disorder), 
Raktav ¤k¢ra (Disorders of blood), Tvak roga (Skin diseases), Udara (Urtic aria), Udavarta (A condition like 
partial intestinal obstraction), Vra ´a (Ulcer) 
 
DOSE- C¦r´a (Powder):   1 to 3 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXVI  ¥½ ¥½ ¥½ ¥½ AND ££££    (Whole Plant)  
 
   ¥½and £ consists of the whole plant of Glinus lotoides L. Syn. Mollugo hirta Thub,  M. lotoides Kuntz. 
(Fam. Aizoaceae), a spreading annual herb with white  hairy aerial parts, distributed in warmer parts of  India 
in plains and also on hills upto 800 m. 
 
SYNONYMS -  Bhissata, Okharadi 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
Ben. :  Duserasag 
Guj. :  Aakaraadya 
Hin. :  Gandibudi 
Kan. :   Chandra kaasi soppa 
Mar. :   Kothuk, Bhisata 
Ori. :   Gandhibuti 
Pun. :   Gandibuti 
Tam. :   Ciruceruppatai  
Tel. :   Chandrasi koora 
 
DESCRIPTION -  
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
Root  -Tap roots well developed, stout, fleshy, long, cream in colour, odour and taste not cha racteristic. 
 
Stem  -Spreading, much branched, villous, bearing pinkish  white flowers in axillary fascicles, odour nil and  
taste not characteristic. 
 
Leaf  -Leaves opposite, more than two at nodes, one to two cm in width and 0.5 to  1.5 cm in length and densely 
villous on both sides, broadly obovate or sub orbic ulate, very obtuse at the apex, cuneate at the base, p etioles 
6 to 10 mm long, slender, hairy, vein inconspicuous, od our nil and taste not characteristic.  
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
Root  -TS shows circular outline; epidermis single layer of thick walled cells; four to five layers of thin walled 
parenchymatous cortex; followed by stele showing anomalous seco ndary growth; consisting of successive rings 
of alternate xylem and phloem; xylem consists of solitary wide c ircular thick walled vessels, in between the 
successive rings, thin walled parenchyma present; star ch grains present; pith absent. 
 
Stem  -Cuticle present, epidermis single layered barrel shaped cells;  a few cells shows papillary growth, cortex 
consists of 4 to 5 layers of loosely packed parenchyma, some c ells contain druses; two to three layers of stone cells 
alternating with sclerenchymatous fibers forms the pericycle; stele shows phloem and many solitary circular 
vessels embedded in thick walled xylem parenchyma; pith large, par enchymatous; starch grains present; a few 
cells contain druses. 
 
Leaf- 
  CCXVII  Petiole - TS circular in outline; epidermal cells thin walled with cuticl e; epidermal outgrowths of stellate hair mostly 
dichotomously branched, with four celled stalk; corti cal region parenchymatous with intercellular spaces, a few cell s 
contain druses; vascular strand single, deeply arc sha ped with many radial files of 2 to 5 xylem elements; phloem 
present on the abaxial side of the xylem strands; a few layer of ground tissue with smaller cells surroun d the 
vascular arc. 
 
Midrib - TS of midrib shows abaxial side slightly curved; ep idermal cells single layer, barrel shaped; 
cuticle present; palisade parenchyma continuous wit h lamina, two layered followed by 3 to 5 layers loo sely 
arranged spongy parenchyma, some cells contain drus es; single vascular strand arc shaped; xylem 
elements in radial groups; phloem present on the ab axial side of the xylem strands. 
 
Lamina - Dorsiventral; epidermis single layered; cuticle pre sent; two layers of palisade parenchyma followed 
by loosely arranged spongy parenchyma, some cells c ontain druses; lower epidermis shows stellate hair 
dichotomously branched with 3 celled stalk; in surf ace view abaxial epidermal cell walls sinuous and 
adaxial slightly wavy; stomata anomocytic type; sto matal number 23 to 25 / mm 2 for abaxial epidermis; 18 to 
20 / mm 2 for abaxial epidermis; stomatal index 43 to 45 for  abaxial epidermis and 25 to 29 for adaxial 
epidermis; palisade ratio 2 to 4; vein islet number  4 to 5. 
 
Powder -Greyish green, no characteristic odour and taste, stellate hair druses, fibres, vessels, 
starch grains measuring upto 5 µ in diameter and elongated pitted stone cells lengt h upto 150 µ narrow 
lumen. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH - 
 
Foreign matter - Not more than     2  per cent,   Appendix  2.2.2  
Total ash - Not more than   12   per cent,   Appendix  2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash - Not more than     1  per cent,   Appendix  2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive - Not less than       8  per cent,   Appendix  2.2.6  
Water-soluble extractive - Not less than     23   per cent,   Appendix  2.2.7  
Fixed oil - Not less than       3   per cent,   Appendix  2.2.8  
 
T.L.C. - 
  T.L.C. of chloroform extract on aluminium plate precoated with silica  gel ‘G’ F 254  (0.2 mm thickness) 
using toluene: ethyl acetate  (9:1) under UV 254 nm shows  spots at R f. 0.10, 0.17, 0.24, 0.29, 0.46, 0.54, 0.61 and 
0.71 (all green). Under UV 366 nm fluorescent spots appear at R f. 20 (pink) 0.32 (blue), 0.37 (pink), 0.41 (dark 
pink), 0.49 (blue), 0.54 (pink) and 0.59 (dark pink). On exposure to iodine vapour  spots appear at R f. 0.24, 0.65, 0.69 
and 0.98 (all brown). On dipping the plate in vanillin-sulphuric acid reagent  and on heating at 105° for 5 
minutes  spots appear at R f. 0.11 (grey), 0.18 (green), 0.29, 0.35 (both grey), 0.39 (green), 0.45, 0.53 (both grey) , 
0.59 (green), 0.74, 0.80 and 0.98 (all grey). 
 
CONSTITUENTS – Mollugogenol A,B,C,D,E,F and G; mollugocin A and B; β-and γ-  sitosterol glucosides; oleanolic 
acid; apigenin-8-C-glucoside; apigenin-7-rhamnogluc oside; pelargonidin-3-sophorsido-7-glucoside; escul in; sulfuretin; 
vicenin 2; vitexin. 
  
PROPERTIES AND  ACTION - 
 
Rasa :  Ka ¾¢ ya, Tikta   CCXVIII  Gu ´´ ´´a :  Laghu, R ¦k¾a 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  ¹ ¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka :  Ka °u 
Karma :  Jvaraghna, Kapha-pittahara, Pau ¾°ika, ¹othahara, Stambhana, Udardapra ºamana 
  
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Bhissata Gunah 
  
THERAPEUTIC USES-  Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), Udararoga (Dise ases of 
abdomen), Vidradhi (Abscess), Vra ´a (Ulcer) 
  
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder) : 3 to 6 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXIX  VAJR ¡¡ ¡¡NNA  (Leaf Base)  
 
            Vajr ¢nna consists of the dried sheathy leaf bases of Pennisetum typhoides  (Burm.) Stapf & C.E. Hubb, Syn. 
P. typhoideum  Rich., P. spicatum  Roem and Schult  [Fam. Poaceae (Graminae)], cultivated in the a rid and semi-
arid regions of central and peninsular India for its fruit used as cereal. 
  
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES-  
Ben.       :   Bajar, Lahra 
Eng. :   Spiked millet, Pearl millet, Bullrush millet 
Guj. :   Bajni 
Hin. :   Bajra  
Kan. :   Sajjai 
Mal. :   Mattari 
Mar. :   Bajri, Bjr 
Ori. :   Gantia, Bajri 
Pun. :   Bajra  
Tam. :   Kambu, Kampu 
Tel. :   Gantelu, Sajjalu, Sajja 
Urd. :   Bajra 
 
DESCRIPTION -   
 
a)  Macroscopic : 
 
           Leaf bases  sheathy, recurved, bearing ligules, shining, straw colour ed, with smooth adaxial surface and 
finely lined cream coloured abaxial surface; 1.5 to 2 cm in width and 14 to16 cm in length; venation parallel, 
lamina absent, odour and taste indistinct.  
 
b)  Microscopic: 
 
          TS of leaf base shows adaxial and abaxial epidermis, mesophyll and va scular bundles; epidermal cells of 
adaxial surface are rectangular elongated, compactly arranged; epidermal cells of abaxial surface tabular, some of 
which are differentiated into bulliform cells but ruptured due to drying  of the leaf; mesophyll undifferentiated, 
composed of spongy tissue, cells isodiametric, thin walled, filled wi th chloroplasts and aggregates of prismatic 
calcium oxalate crystals; some of the mesophyll cells aggreg ated around vascular bundles to form a bundle sheath 
filled with starch grains measuring about 10 µ in diameter; vascular bundles linearly arranged in the mesophyll, 
collateral, closed, xylem towards adaxial surface, phloem towards aba xial surface;  xylem contains 3 to 5 vessels, 
arranged in ‘Y’ form, 30 to 40 µ in diameter, with annular and spiral thickenings, along with xylem pa renchyma 
and xylem fibres; phloem patch contains sieve tubes, phloem parenchyma a nd phloem fibres; every vascular 
bundle is associated with a sclerenchymatous bundle cap towards abaxial  surface; sclereids thick walled, compactly 
arranged, and polygonal; in surface view the intercostal epidermal cells of adaxial surface are axially elongated, 
rectangular comparatively thin and nearly straight walled, lengt h 100 to 350 µ and width 30 to 55 µ; costal cells 
linear, thin and straight walled, 250 to 425 µ long 12 to 22 µ broad;  intercostal cells of abaxial surface are of two 
types;   rectangular, elongate 80 to 125 µ long 20 to 30 µ broad and squarish, smaller  silica cells,  30 to 40 µ long 
and  20 to 30 µ broad; walls of both the type of cells are deeply sinuate; stomat a in both the epidermal layers are 
paracytic type, with two dumb-bell shaped guard cells, 14 to 25 µ long 4 to 8 µ broad, inner walls thickened with 
lignin, subsidiary cells two, bean shaped 21 to 30 µ long and 6.5 to 9.5 µ broad, hyaline, situated parallel to the  CCXX  long axis of guard cells;  stomata in both the epidermal layers a re arranged in vertical rows; but scattered over 
intercostal cells in adaxial surface; characteristically r estricted to two vertical rows on either side of every vein 
region on abaxial surface; stomatal index of adaxial surface is 8 or 9 and that of abaxial s urface it is 10 or 11.   
 
Powder - Greyish brown in colour, fine in texture, consisting of epidermal cells  of adaxial and abaxial surface; cells 
of adaxial epidermis elongated, walls straight; cells of abaxial  epidermis two types – rectangular, with sinuate walls 
and smaller silica cells; stomata present; sclereids from bundle  caps, which are thick walled, isodiametric, 8 to 18 µ 
in diameter; vessels with annular and spiral thickenings; fibres , and aggregates of prismatic calcium oxalate 
crystals upto 15 µ in diameter. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -  
 
Foreign matter  -   Not more than     2   per cent,  Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash  -   Not more than   15   per cent,  Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -   Not more than   12   per cent,  Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  -   Not less than       6   per cent,  Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive    -   Not less than     15   per cent,  Appendix   2.2.7 
 
 T.L.C. - 
 
          T.L.C. of alcoholic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate using  n-hexane:ethyl acetate  (8:2) under UV 366 
nm shows fluorescent zones at R f. values 0.10, 0.44, 0.50, 0.61, 0.82 and 0.86; on spraying with 5% methanolic 
sulphuric acid reagent  and heating the plate for 10 minutes at 105 °  spots appear at R f. 0.10, 0.40, 0.44, 0.50, 0.61, 
0.82, 0.86 and 0.93. 
 
CONSTITUENTS – Flavonoid, alkaloids, tannins, phenols and saponin.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa :  Madhura, Ka ¾¢ ya  
Gu ´´ ´´a :  R ¦k¾a, Guru 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka :  Amla 
Karma :  Balya, Durjara, H ¨dya, Kaphav ¢tahara, Pittahara, Pu ¼stvahara, V ¢takara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES-  Prameha (Metabolic disorder), ¹aitya (Milk), Santarpa ´ajanya roga, Sthaulya 
(Obesity) 
  
DOSE – Svarasa  ( Juice): 10 to 20 ml. 
 
  CCXXI  V¡¡ ¡¡LUK ¡¡ ¡¡-- --¹¡ ¹¡ ¹¡ ¹¡ KA (Leaf) 
 V¢luk ¢-¹¢ ka is the dried leaves of  Gisekia pharnaceoides L. Syn. G. molluginoides  Wt. (Fam. Aizoaceae) 
which is a spreading herb with diffused branches of about 20 to 35 cm in le ngth, distributed in coastal areas and 
arid zones of India.  
 
SYNONYMS-  V ¢luk ¢ 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
Ben. :   Valuka 
Hin. :   Balukaasaaga 
Mal. :   Panckirai 
Mar. :   Vaaluchi-bhaaji 
Tam. :  Manalkirai 
Tel. :  Eskadantikura 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
a) Macroscopic:  
 
        Leaves simple, opposite, fleshy and brittle; bulk colour reddish brown to gr eenish yellow; petiole 1.5 to 3 mm 
long, slightly groved above; lamina 7 to 13 mm long and 3 to 7 mm broad, elliptic, oblong to oblanceolate in shape, 
glabrous; tip obtuse and apiculate, base cuneate, narrow and unequal; margi n entire; slightly recurved, veins 
obscure; slightly bitter and no characteristic odour.    
 
b) Microscopic: 
         Dorsiventral in nature; TS shows recurved margin with narrow deep furrow ed midrib; upper epidermis single 
layer of large cells with cuticle; followed by one or two layers of palisade;  vascular bundle horse shoe shaped, with 
12 to 16 xylem vessels in a row in the centre; phloem just below the xylem; parenchymatous cells present above 
the xylem; and below the vascular bundle there is a patch of polygonal parenchyma cells extending to the lower 
epidermis; small, oval starch grains present in most of the pare nchymatous cells; many acicular calcium oxalate 
crystals of length 34 to 44 µ scattered throughout and also as raphides in lower spongy parenchyma; s tomata 
anomocytic. 
 
Powder- Powder grey with a brownish tinge, microscopic observation shows compac t polygonal epidermal 
parenchyma with anomocytic stomata; oval or round starch grains, 20 to 25 µ across, with a linear hilum; needle 
shaped calcium oxalate crystals, 38 to 58 µ long, pitted and spiral vessels. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
Foreign matter   - Not more than   2   per cent ,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash    - Not more than 12   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Sulphated ash   - Not more than 20   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Acid-insoluble ash   - Not more than   1   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Alcohol-soluble extractive  - Not less than     7   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than   30   per cent,   Appendix 2.2.8 
T.L.C. - 
  T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate  (0.2 mm thick) using n-
hexane:chloroform:methanol  (4:5:1) after spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and heating at 105 o  CCXXII  for 5 minutes, shows  spots at R f. 0.10 (light pink ), 0.20 (light pink), 0.37 (light pink), 0.60 (light pink), 0.68 (light 
pink),0.77 (light pink), 0.83 (pink) 0.92 (light pink) and 0.98 (dark pink). 
 
CONSTITUENTS- Oxalic, tartaric, citric and succinic acids besides triacontane, myristone, t etracosanol and 
dotriacontane.       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa :  Tikta, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a :  Laghu, R ¦ksa 
V¤¤¤¤rya :  ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka :  Ka °u 
Karma :  Anulomana, K ¨mighna, Ku ¾°haghna,  
   Durgandhan ¢º ana 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS-   Lava ¬g¢dhya - c ¦r´a, Baluka Guna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES-  Ka ´² u (Itching), Kr /uniF023mi (Helminthiasis), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of skin), 
Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder) 
 
DOSE-   C¦r´a (Powder) : 3 to 6 g.  CCXXIII  VANYA-A¹¹ ¹¹VAGOLA (Fresh Leaf) 
 
  Vanya-a ¹vagola consists of fresh leaves of Plantago lanceolata  L. (Fam. Plantaginaceae), a small herb 
found in Western Himalayas. It is also cultivated through out the greater part of Indi a. 
 
SYNONYMS – Vanya-i¾adgola, Me ¾a-jihv ¢ 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES-  
DESCRIPTION -  
A perennial plant with a rosette of lanceolate ribbed leaves whic h grow from the root-stalk, petioles 
margined; leaves green, 7.5 to 20 by 2 to 2.5 cm, multicostate, convergent  venation, 3 to 5 ribbed, margin entire, 
lamina tapering downwards in a short broad and curved stalk; taste and odour characteris tic. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -  
Foreign matter  -  Not more than    2      per cent,   Appendix    2.2.2 
Total ash   - Not more than  24.5   per cent,   Appendix    2.2.3 
Acid - insoluble ash  -  Not more than  1.7     per cent,   Appendix    2.2.4 
Alcohol - soluble extractive -   Not less than    12      per cent,   Appendix    2.2.6 
Water - soluble extractive  - Not less than    35      per cent,   Appendix    2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. – 
 
Take 2 g of the dried, powdered drug and extract with methanol (2 x 25 ml) , by refluxing on a waterbath. 
Filter and concentrate the pooled extract. Adjust the volume to 10 ml w ith ethanol and apply about 20 µl on 
precoated silica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254  plate (thickness 0.2 mm). 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate  using toluene: ethyl acetate:formic acid: 
methanol  (3:3:0.8:0.2), after spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and heating at 105 o for 5 minutes, 
shows  spots R f. 0.11 (green), 0.17 (orange),0.37  (violet), 0.46 (violet), 0.53 (light purple), 0.59 (purpl e), 0.69 
(pink), 0.78  (violet), 0.91 (light purple) and 0.98  (light purple). 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Chlorogenic acid, chrysophanic acid, emodin, luteolin, plantaginin, scutellarin,  aesculetin.  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa   : Ka ¾¢ya, Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a              : Snigdha, Guru 
V¤¤¤¤rya   : ¹¤ta 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka  : Madhura  Ben.   : Bartung 
Eng.   : Ribwort  
Hin.    : Baltanga, Jangali isabgola 
Kan.    : Siriportlagida 
Mar.    : Baltang 
Pun.    : Kashur-gul 
Tel.    : Adavi ishapugorulu 
Urd.    : Bartang 
  CCXXIV  Karma  : M ¦trala, Rakta-stambhana, Ras ¢yana, ¹othahara, Sr ¼sana,   
       Vedan ¢º¢maka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES - Ar ºa (Piles),  Kar ´aº¦la (Otalgia), As ¨a gdara (Menorrhagia or metrorrhagia or both), 
Danta º¦la (Tooth ache), K ¢sa (Cough), Raktasr ¢va (Haemmorhage), ¹otha (Oedema), ¹v¢sa (Asthma), Vra ´a 
(Ulcer)  
 
DOSE –  Patra Svarasa (Leaf Juice): 5 to 10 ml. 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXXV  VETRA (Rhizome)  
 
 Vetra is the dried rhizomes of Calamus rotang  L. (Fam. Arecaceae) a thorny climbing shrub occurring in 
central and southern India. It is restricted to the plains along the backwaters and coa sts. 
 
SYNONYMS –  Vetraka, Roma ºara, Tejana 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. : Chaachi bet 
Eng. : Cane, Common rattan  
Guj. : Netar 
Hin. : Beta, Vet, Bent 
Kan. : Betasu 
Mal. : Chural 
Mar. : Veta, Thor veta 
Ori. : Beta 
Tam. : Pirampu  
Tel. : Sanna Bettamu, Pemu 
 
DESCRIPTION – 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
  
Rhizome horizontal and branched; woody, stiff and rough in texture; light gr ey to brown in bulk; 
individual pieces tortuous in shape, size ranging from 1 to 5 cm long and 1 to 4 cm in cross section; cut surface 
shows an inner creamy ring and an outer brownish narrow ring; rhizome m arked with wavy annulations at the 
nodes; internodal length ranges from 3 to 12 mm; with roots arising fr om the internode; fracture, very tough, 
fibrous; no characteristic odour bitter in taste. 
 
b) Microscopic: 
 
 TS of rhizome circular in outline; epidermis single layered; cor tical cells thin walled, parenchyma 
polygonal towards the epidermis and gradually become circular, with intercellula r spaces; cortex shows many resin 
canals which are red in colour; scattered circular patches of sc lerenchymatous cells, about 200 µ in dia. present , 
followed by an endodermis of a single layer of elongated cells;  v ascular bundles many, scattered, each circular in 
outline and has a sclerenchymatous cap; phloem consists of phloem parenchy ma, sieve tubes and companion cells;  
xylem with a large vessel of 62 to 88 µ dia. and with 1 to 3 smaller vessels; starch grains oval or ci rcular in shape 
and present in many cells in cortex and stele. 
 
Powder - Cream to brown, bitter to taste and with no characteristic odour; m icroscopic observation shows starch 
grains of about 5 µ across and round to oval in shape; stone cells of about 35 µ width and triangular to oval in 
shape with a narrow lumen; reddish resinous masses; slender and wiry  fibres of approximately 10 µ width; pitted 
and spiral vessels and wood parenchyma. 
 
 
  CCXXVI  IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
 
Foreign matter  - Not more than   2   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2   
Total ash   - Not more than   3   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3  
Acid-insoluble ash  - Not more than   1   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.4  
Alcohol-soluble extractive - Not less than   10   per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6     
Water-soluble extractive - Not less than     9  per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7   
 
 T.L.C. – 
 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate  (0.2 mm thickness) using n-hexane: 
chloroform  (3:7) as after spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and heating at 105 o for 5 minutes 
shows spots at 0.28 (yellow), 0.33 (pink), 0.45 (light pink), 0.51 (yellow), 0.67 (lig ht pink), 0.72 (yellow),  and 
0.88 (pale yellow). 
 
CONSTITUENTS - Saponins, alkaloids and flavonoids. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa : Ka °u, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu 
V¤¤¤¤rya : ¹ita 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Cedana, D ¤pana, Kaphahara, M ¦trala, Pittahara, Vi ¾aghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Venta Gu ´a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES-  Ar ºa (Piles), Aruci (Tastelessness), A ºmar ¤ (Calculus), D ¢ha (Burning sensation), 
Jvara (Fever),  K āsa (Cough), Ku ¾°ha (Leprosy / diseases of skin), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria), Prameha 
(Metabolic disorder), Prav ¢hik ¢ (Dysentery), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), ¹otha (Inflammation), T ¨¾´¢ 
(Thirst), Tvakroga (Skin diseases), Visarpa (Erysepales), Yoniroga (Di sease of female genital tract) 
 
DOSE – Kvatha (Decoction): 50 to 100 ml. 
              Curna (Powder): 5 to 10 g.  CCXXVII   
VISANIKA (Whole Plant) 
 
 Visanika is the whole plant of Pergularia daemia (Forsskal) Choiv. Syn. Daemia extensa (Jacq.) R.Br. 
(Fam. Asclepiadaceae), a laticiferous twiner found in the plains throughout the hotter  parts of India. 
 
SYNONYMS -  Uttamarani, Yugmaphata 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ben. :         Chhagal bete 
Guj. :         Amaradudheli, Nagaladudhi 
Hin. :         Utaran 
Mal. :         Veliparuthi 
Mar. :         Mendhadhdhi, Utarana 
Ori. :         Utruli, Juktiruhi 
Pun. :         Karial, Siali 
Tam. :         Uttamani, Velipparuthi 
Tel. :         Gittapakau, Dustapuchettu, Dustuputige 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
(a) Macroscopic: 
 
Root  - Straight or branched, 3 to 7 mm in thickness; pale brown externally and c ream coloured in cut surface; 
fracture short in bark, fibrous and splintery in wood, surface rough; mat ure roots fibrous; odour hay like and taste 
bitter. 
 
Stem  - Pubescent, pale green to green; 1 to 3 mm diameter and the internodal length 5 to 15 cm; fracture fibrous; 
pith hollow. 
 
Leaf  - Simple, opposite, pubescent, greenish, rarely brownish; petiole 3 to 6 cm, ha iry; lamina 5 to 10 cm long 
and 4 to 9 cm broad, cordate and ovate to broadly ovate, tip acute to acumi nate; brittle when dry; margin entire, 
veins 3 or 4 pairs, alternate, prominent below, about 3 nerves arise from the base. 
 
Flower  - Inflorescence umbellate raceme, axillary, peduncle up to 12 cm; pedice ls about 2.5 cm, calyx greenish 
with purple tinge; corolla greenish to cream with purple tinge, polli nia pendulous, yellowish, about 1mm; corona 
double; ovary bicarpellary; ovules numerous. 
 
Fruit  -  Follicle, slightly curved, usually in pairs, green; having thick, soft, short, spi nes throughout; broader at the 
base and tapering towards the apex, 3 to 7 cm long and 0.5 to 1.5 cm in width. 
 
Seed  - Ovate with blunt apex and wavy margin, pale to dark brown in colour, 4 to 6 mm in length, comose with 
tuft of long, white, silky hairs at apex; surface minutely pubesent. 
 
(b) Microscopic: 
 
Root:   TS shows cork composed of elongated, lignified cells of about 20 rows; cortical cells elongated or 
polygonal; latex cells present in the cortex, cluster of calcium oxa late crystals present in the cortical cells; starch 
grains also present in most of the cortex and xylem parenchyma; cambium distinct; xyl em parenchyma, vessels and 
tracheids thick walled and lignified; medullary rays uniseriate.   CCXXVIII   
Stem -   TS  circular in outline; epidermis covered by a thin cuticle; trichomes unicellular 30 to 90 µm in length or 
multicellular-uniseriate 125 to 400 µm, occasionally   with collapsed cell; a single layer of colle nchyma followed 
by cortex of 5 to 12 layers of round to polyhedral cells with interspace s; endodermis present; sclerenchymatous 
patches of fibres forming a discontinuous pericycle; phloem with compani on cells and sieve tubes; xylem forms a 
continuous ring composed of xylem vessels with much larger ones towards  periphery and tracheids with smaller 
vessels and xylem parenchyma in the rest of the area;  broken  ring of phloe m patches present internal to the xylem 
and in the periphery of the pith; cells of pith circular to polygonal  with intercellular spaces; many laticifers  
present in the cortex and pith; cluster crystals of  calcium oxalate present in the c ortex and pith where seen. 
  
Leaf –   
 
 Petiole -  TS circular in outline with a groove on the adaxial side; epidermis  with a thick cuticle; unicellular and 
multicellular uniseriate trichomes present, followed by 2 or 3 laye rs of collenchyma, and a cortical   region of 5 to 
12 layers of parenchyma; stele crescent shaped with about 20 vertic al rows of xylem and phloem patches on either 
side of the xylem; smaller vascular strand with a few xylem vessels present laterally placed on either side of the 
groove.  
 
Midrib  - TS along the midrib shows slightly convex above and prominent below; epi dermis followed by 2 to 4 
layers of collenchyma on either side of the midrib; cortical pare nchyma cells circular to polygonal with 
intercellular spaces; vascular bundle crescent shaped with xylem in the middle a nd phloem on either side. 
 
Lamina -  Upper epidermis covered by a thin cuticle followed by a single layer of  palisade cells; spongy mesophyll 
of irregular polyhedral cells present; lower epidermal cells  smaller than the upper; stomata present only on the 
lower side, anomocytic; unicellular and multicellular- uniseriate trichomes  present; laticifers present throughout. 
 
 Powder - Light brown, slightly bitter, no characteristic odour; microscopic exa mination shows globular to ovate 
starch grains with central hilum, 10 to 20 µm in size; rosette crystals 10 to 30 µm across and clustered crystals of 
calcium oxalate; unicellular trichomes of 30 to 90 µm length; multicellular uniseriate trichomes of 130 to 400 µm 
length; several with collapsed cells; long wiry fibres; elonga ted stone cells of 70 to 200 µm length; tissue with 
linear rows of sclerenchymatous cells; vascular elements; spiral, annular,  scalariform, reticulate,  simple pitted and  
border  pitted vessels;  tracheids and epidermal tissue with anomocytic stomata . 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Foreign matter   :  Not more than   2 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.2 
Total ash    :  Not more than 11 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash   :  Not more than   1 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive   :  Not less than     6 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  :  Not less than   14 per cent,   Appendix 2.2.7 
 
T.L.C. - 
 
 T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plat e (0.2mm thickness) using n-hexane: 
chloroform  (3:7), after spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and heating at 105 o for 5 minutes, shows 
spots at   R f. 0.19 (pink), 0.27 (light pink), 0.31 (light pink), 0.39 (violet), 0.42 (light pink), 0.72 (deep violet), 0.79 (  
pink) and 0.83 (light pink).    
 
CONSTITUENTS -  Several cardenolides such as calotropin, calactin, calotropagenin, uzari genin, coroglaucigenin 
and triterpenoids, β−  amyrin and lupeol.     CCXXIX   
PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa :    Ka °u, Ka ¾¢ ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a :    Laghu, R ¦ksa, Vi ¾ada 
V¤¤¤¤rya :    Anu ¾´ a 
Vip ¢¢ ¢¢ka :    Ka °u 
Karma :    Kaphani ªs¢raka, D ¤pana, Virecana, Ku ¾°haghna  
      
   
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Vriscikali Guna 
  
THERAPEUTIC USES - Mah ¢ku ¾tª¢ (Group of major skin diseases), Agnim ¢ndya (Digestive impairment), 
Vibandha (Constipation),Yonido ¾a (Disorder of female genital tract), ¹v¢sa (Asthma),  ¹otha 
(Inflammation), M ¦trak ¨cchra (Dysuria) 
  
DOSE -  C ¦r´a (Powder): 1 to 3 g. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXXX  V§§ §§NT ¡¡ ¡¡MLAPHALA (Fruit Rind)  
 V¨nt ¢mlaphala consists of the fruit rind of Garcinia pedunculata  Roxb.  (Fam. Guttiferae), a tall stately 
tree 60 m high with fluted trunk and rather short spreading branches, wi th fruits of about 10 to 12 cm in length and 
about 8 cm in width found sporadically in upper Assam up to an altitude of 3000 feet and in Manipur;  occasionally 
cultivated;  fresh mature fruits are cut and rind dried before use. 
 
SYNONYMS -  V ¨nt ¢mlaphala 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass. :  Borthekera 
Ben. :  Tikul, Tikur, Thaikal 
Hin. :  Amalbeda 
Kan. :  Chaarigehuli 
Tam. :  Pulivanchi 
Tel. :  Pullaprabbali 
Urd. :  Amalbeda 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
a) Macroscopic: 
 
 Freshly dried drug occurs as curved and flat pieces of rind of about 7 cm in length and about 0.2 cm in 
thickness, leathery, pliable, non fibrous, blackish brown in colour; some of the pieces bear pedicels and the 
remnants of the persistent calyx having four lobes; no characteristic odour, taste  sour; 
 
b)  Microscopic: 
 
Pedicel - TS of pedicel shows wavy outline; epidermis single layered; thic k cuticle present; cortex parenchymatous 
with thick walked cells showing intercellular spaces; prismat ic and rosette crystals of calcium oxalate and brown 
contents present throughout cortex; secretory canals present all over  the region; pericycle discontinuous with 
patches of collenchyma; stele shows wavy outline with a continuous band of phloem and xylem interrupted by 
medullary rays; pith large, parenchymatous showing several isolat ed anomalous amphicribral vascular bundles at 
the periphery. 
 
Fruit - TS of fruit rind shows single layered epidermis; cuticle present ; unicellular trichome occasionally present; 
mesocarp parenchymatous; prismatic and rosette crystals of calc ium oxalate and brown contents present in cells of 
several layers of mesocarp, just below the epidermis; secretor y cells present all over the region; middle and inner 
mesocarp shows amphicribral vascular bundles with a clear endodermis. 
 
Powder - Parenchyma cells of epidermal tissue of pedicel in surface vie w showing paracytic stomata, spiral and 
scalariform vessels from rind trichomes, rosette crystals of  calcium oxalate, non septate fibres up to 400 µ. in 
length from pedicel. 
 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH – 
Foreign matter    -         Not more than   2     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash    -         Not more than   3     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.3  CCXXXI  Acid-insoluble ash                     -         Not more than    2     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive       -         Not less   than  39     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive   -         Not less than     42     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.7 
Fixed oil                             -         Not less than       1     per cent,   Appendix   2.2.8 
 
T.L.C- 
 T.L.C. of dichloromethane extract on aluminium plates precoated with si lica gel ‘G’ 60 F 254   (0.2 mm 
thickness) using toluene: ethyl acetate  (5:1.5) under UV 366 nm shows fluorescent zones at R f. 0.55, 0.93 and 0.96 
(all blue). Under UV 254 nm spot appears at R f.0.3 (green).  On exposure to iodine vapour  spots appear at R f. 0.61 
and 0.65 (both yellow).  On dipping in vanillin-sulphuric acid  and on heating for 5 minutes at 105 o shows  spots at 
Rf. 0.25 (blue), 0.44 (greenish blue), 0.84 (dark blue) and 0.95 (greenish blue). 
 
CONSTITUTENTS - Pedunculol; garcinol; cambogin. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION- 
 
Rasa : Amla, Ka ¾¢ya 
Gu ´´ ´´a : R ¦k¾a, T ¤k¾´a, Snigdha, Laghu 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Amla 
Karma : Anulomaka, Bhedana, D ¤pana, Kaphahara, M ¦trala, P ¢cana,    
  V¢tahara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Amlavetasa Guna, Amlavetasa Phala, Amlavetasa Phala Guna 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES ---- ¡ n¢ha (Distension of abdomen due to obstruction to passage of urine and stools), 
Aj ¤r´a (Indigestion), A ºmar ¤ (Calculus), Ar ºa (Piles), Aruci (Tastelessness), Gulma (Abdominal lump), 
H¨droga (Heart disease), Hikk ¢ (Hiccup), K ¨mi (Worm infestation), K ¢sa (Cough), Pl ¤h¢roga (Splenic 
disease), Śū la (Pain / Colic), ¹v¢sa (Asthma), Ud ¢varta (Upward movement of gases), Vibandha 
(Constipation) 
   
DOSE - Svarasa (Juice): 5 to 10 ml. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXXXII  V§¹¹ ¹¹CIKAKANDA  (Rhizome) 
V¨¹cikakanda  consists of dried rhizomes of Doronicum hookeri  C.B.Clarke (Fam. Asteraceae), a robust 
herb growing in the Sikkim and Himalaya region between 3500 to 4200 m. 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Pun.  : Daarunaj-akrabi 
Urd.  : Darunaj Aqrabi 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
a) Macroscopic:  
Brown irregular pieces 3 to 5 cm long and 0.2 to 0.8 cm in width; scale leaf s cars present; fracture smooth, 
taste starchy, astringent, odour present but not specific.   
b) Microscopic:  
 TS of rhizome shows 3 or 4 layers of cork containing thin walled cel ls; cortex parenchymatous; vascular 
bundles numerous, arranged in a ring in the outer region of the cortex, eac h surrounded by a bundle sheath of 
sclerenchymatous fibres; phloem present towards the periphery and xyle m towards the pith region, almost all the 
cells of cortex and pith are compactly filled with simple starc h grains of various size ranging from about 10 to 60 
µ; some cells of the cortex are filled with yellowish brown colouring matter. 
Powder - Light yellowish brown, shows simple and compound starch grains of various sizes, about upto 60 µ and 
spherical, sub-spherical to ovoid in shape with a radiate hilum and very faint st riations that are visible only in large 
starch grains; individual or groups of parenchymatous cells filled w ith starch grains; fibres sclerenchymatous, non-
septate, lignified with tapering ends, broad lumened, ranging from 76 to 125 µ in length; xylem vessels with spiral 
and reticulate thickenings; taste slightly astringent; odour present but not spec ific. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH -  
Foreign matter  -  Not more than     2    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.2 
Total ash   - Not more than     4    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.3 
Acid-insoluble ash  -  Not more than   0.7   per cent,    Appendix   2.2.4 
Alcohol-soluble extractive -   Not less than     6.6   per cent,    Appendix   2.2.6 
Water-soluble extractive  - Not less than     20    per cent,    Appendix   2.2.7  
 
T.L.C. – 
 
Take 2 g of the powdered drug and extract with methanol (2 x 25 ml), by r efluxing on a water bath. Filter 
and concentrate the pooled extract. Adjust the volume to 10 ml with ethanol  and apply about 20 µl on precoated 
silica gel 60 F 254  plate (0.2 mm thickness). 
T.L.C. of the methanolic extract on precoated silica gel ‘G’ plate  using toluene:ethyl acetate  (5:4 ) after 
spraying with anisaldehyde sulphuric acid reagent  and heating at 105 o for 5 minutes, shows spots at   R f. 0.15 (light 
blue), 0.30 (blue), 0.40 (blue), 0.52 (pink), 0.61 (blue), 0.68  (blue) and 0.77 (blue).  
CONSTITUENTS - Essential oil. 
 
  CCXXXIII   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 PROPERTIES AND ACTION – 
 
Rasa : Tikta  
Gu ´´ ´´a : R ¦k¾a, Laghu, Sugandhi 
V¤¤¤¤rya : U ¾´a 
Vip ¢¢¢¢ka : Ka °u 
Karma : Anulomana, Kaphahara, Vi ¾aghna, H ¨dbalya, Jvaraghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug  
 
 THERAPEUTIC USES-  ¡ n¢ha (Distension of abdomen due to obstruction to passage of urine and stools), 
Ardita (Facial palsy), Da ¼ºavi ¾a (Poisoning due to bites) (Stink), Garbh ¢ºaya º¦la (Uterine pain), H ¨droga 
(Heart disease), Pak ¾avadha (Paralysis/Hemiplegia), Udara º¦la (Pain in the abdomen), V ¨ºcika Da ¼ºa 
(Scorpian bites (Stink), V ¢taroga (Disease due to Vata dosa), V ¢tika Unm ¢da (Mania / Psychosis), 
Granthikajvara (Bubonic plague) 
 
DOSE - C¦r´a (Powder): 1 to 3 g.  CCXXXIV   
DĀĀ ĀĀRUSIT ĀĀ ĀĀ TAILA (Cinnamomum Oil)  
 
D¢rusit ¢ Taila is distilled from the dried inner bark of the shoots of coppic ed tree of Cinnamomum 
zeylanicum  Blume.  
 
SYNONYMS-  Tanu tvak taila, Darusita taila, Tvak taila 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass. : Dalcina taila 
Ben. : Daaruchini taila 
Eng. : Cinnamon oil  
Guj. : Taja taila 
Hindi : Daalchini taila 
Mal. : Karuva patte enna 
Mar. : Daalchini taila 
Ori. : Daalchini taila 
Pun. : Daalchini taila 
Tam. : Karuv ¢pa °°ai E ´´ ai 
Tel. : Dalachini nune 
Urdu : Rogan- dalachini 
 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
 
 A yellow liquid when freshly distilled, gradually becoming reddish-br own with age; odour and taste, 
characteristic of Cinnamon, taste sweetish and aromatic. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Optical rotation :  0º to –2º,     Appendix 3.3 
Refractive index :   1.573 to 1.600,     Appendix 3.1.1 
Weight per ml  :  1.000 to 1.040g,                      Appendix 3.1.2 
Assay                        :  Contains not less than 55.0 per cent w/w and not more than 70.0 per cent w/w of 
cinnamaldehyde, C 9H8O. 
Microbial limits  :  Complies with API                     Appendix 2.4 
Pesticide residue :  Complies with API                 Appendix 2.5 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXXXV  PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
Rasa :  Madhura, Tikta, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, Ruksa, Tik ¾´a 
Virya :  U¾´a 
Vip āā āāka :  Katu 
Karma :  Ārtavapravartaka, Balya, Dantya, Dipana, Ka ´thya, Mukhadurgandhanasana, P ācana, 
Pittahara, Pratidu ¾aka, Sugandhi, Śukrajanana, Uttejaka, V ātahara, V ātanulomaka, 
Vra ´aśodhaka, Vr ā´aropaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Used as single drug  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Ādhm āna (Flatulance with gurgling sound), Āmado śa (Products of impaired 
digestion and metabolism), Āmāsaya śū la (Peptic ulcer), Āntrika pratid ūsaka (Entritis), Ar śa (Piles), 
Chardi (Emesis), Danta śula (Toothache), Dhvajabha ´ga (Failure of penile erection), Krmi 
(Helminthiasis/Worm infestation), Ksayaja vra ´a (Tubercular wound), Mukha śosa (Dryness of mouth), 
Nādi śula (Acute pain of nerbine origin), Pinasa (Chronic rhinitis/Sinusitis ), Pr āti śyāya (Coryza), 
R¢jayak ¾mā ( Tuberculosis), Raktav ¤kāra (Disorders of blood), Śula (Pain), Trs ´ā (Thirst ), Vrscika dam śa 
(Scorpion bite)  
 
DOSE- 1 to 3 drops. 
 
STORAGE :  Cinnamum oil should be stored in a well- filled, well-closed contai ner, protected from light, and 
stored in cool place.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXXXVI  GANDHAP ¥RA PATRA TAILA 
 
Gandhap ¦ra  Patra Taila is the oil obtained by the steeping and fermentation of  fresh leaves of Gaultheria 
fragrantissima  Wall. (Fam. Ericaceae).  
SYNONYMS – Gandhap ūrna taila, Carmapatra 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES - 
Ben. : Gandapuro 
Eng. : Oil of wintergreen, Indian-Wintergreen 
Guj. : Gandhapuro 
Hindi. : Gandpuro, Gandhapuraa kaa tel, Machino 
Kan. : Gandhapura 
Mar. : Gandhapura 
Ori. : Gandhapura 
Pun. : Gandhapura 
Tel. : Gandhapura tailam 
Urdu. : Gandhapura 
Latin  : Oleum Gaultheriale 
 
DESCRIPTION –  
 
Gandpura  patra taila consists of colourless or nearly colourless oil; odour-s trong, characteristic; taste 
pungent, soluble in 6 parts of alcohol (70 per cent).  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Identification-  Take 2 ml of oil, add a drop of ferric   chloride solution ; a violet colour      
                          is produced.          
Specific gravity   : At 15.5 °, 1.180 to 1.187,  Appendix 3.1.2 
Optical rotation     : At 25 °, 0 ° to-1°,               Appendix 3.3  
Refractive index    : At 20 °, 1.537 to 1.539,     Appendix 3.1.1 
Assay -    Determination of esters   : Not less than 98 percent,  Appendix 2.2.25 
(methyl salicylate C 8 H 8 O 3.)  
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
Rasa : Madhura, Tikta, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Tik ¾´ a, Snigdha 
Virya : U¾´ a 
Vip āā āāka : Ka ¶u 
Karma : Putihara, Sa ´gr āhi, Svedala, Uttejaka, V ātahara, V ātānulomaka, 
Vedanasthapana 
 
 
  CCXXXVII  IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Used as single drug 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Āmav āta (Rheumatism), A ´kuša k ¨mi (Hookworm), Atis āra (Diarrhoea), 
Danta ºula (Toothache), G ¨dhrasi (Sciatica), Jvara (Fever), N ā²iºūla (Acute pain of nerbine origin), 
Udarak rmi (Intestinal worms), V āta-rakta (Gout) 
 
DOSE- 0.1 to  0.5 ml. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXXXVIII  GOGH §TA (Clarified Cow’s Butter) 
  
Gogh ¨ta consists of clarified butter derived from cow’s milk to whic h no colouring matter or preservative 
is added and contains not less than 76.0 per cent of milk fat by weight. 
 
SYNONYMS - Ajya, Havisya, Sarpih, Ghrta 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass. : Ghee 
Ben. : Gava Ghee, Gava Ghrit 
Eng. : Clarified butter 
Guj. : Ghee 
Hindi. : Gaya Ghee 
Kan. : Tuppa  
Mal. : Pasu Ney, Pasu Nei 
Mar. : Toop 
Ori. : Gai Ghia 
Pun. : Ghee 
Tam. : Nei 
Tel. : Neyyi, Nei 
Urd. : Gaya ka ghee 
 
DESCRIPTION -  
 
An oily liquid or a semi solid at room temperature, granular in text ure, colour white to light yellow, odour 
rich,  taste pleasant. It shall be free from animal fats, wax, mineral oil, vege table oils and fats. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Specific gravity            - At 25 °C,1.01995 ,                  Appendix 3.1.2   
Reichert Meissel Value    -24-28,                                     Appendix 3.14 
Moisture      - Not more than 0.5 per cent,  Appendix 2.2.10 
Saponification Value     - Not more than 225,             Appendix 3.7 
Iodine Value      - Not more than 35,                 Appendix 3.8 
Unsaponifiable matter                              - Not more than 1.5 per cent,   Appendix  3.11                                                                             
Carotene                                                      - Not less than  2000 IU          
Microbial limits      -Complies with API,               Appendix 2.4 
Heavy Metals                   -Complies with API,               Appendix 2.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXXXIX  PROPERTIES AND ACTION- 
 
Rasa : Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Guru, Snigdha, M ¨du 
Virya : Śita 
Vip āā āāka : Madhura 
Karma 
 : Agnidipana, Anabhi ¾yandi, Ayu ¾ya, Balya, Cak ¾u¾ya, Dipana, H ¨dya, K āntiprad ā, 
Medhya, Ojovardhaka, Ras āyana, Rucya, Slesmavardhana, Snehana, Śukravardhaka, 
Tejobalakara, Tvacya, V ātapittapra śamana, Vaya ªª ªªsthpa āna, Vi ¾ahara, V ¨¾ ya.   
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Brahmi gh ¨ta, Triphala gh ¨ta, A ºoka gh ¨ta, El ¢di gh ¨ta, C ¢nger ¤ gh ¨ta, 
Am ¨t¢ gh ¨ta    
  
THERAPEUTIC USES- Agnidagdha (Accidental burns), Amlapitta (Hyperacidity), Apasm āra (Epilepsy), 
Aruci (Tastelessness), Graha ´ī (Malabsorption syndrome ), J īr´ajvara (Chronic fever), Karnasula (Otalgia), 
Ksataksina (Debility due to chest injury), Mada (Intoxication), Murc ha (Syncope), Sirahsula (Headache), 
Smrtinasa (Loss of memory), Sosa (Cachexia), Unmada (Mania/phychosi s), Visamajvara (Intermittent 
fever), Visarpa (Erysepales), Visavikara (Disorders due to poison), Yonisula  (Pain in female genital tract)  
 
DOSE - 5 to 20 ml.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXL  GUDA (Jaggery)  
 
 Guda is the product obtained by concentrating juice expressed from the stems of  
Saccharum officinarum L. (Fam. Poaceae) with or without prior purification of the juice, followed by cooling. 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES - 
 
Beng .   :  Guda 
Eng.    :  Jaggery 
Hin.    :  Guda 
Kan.   :  Bella  
Mal.       :  Sarkara  
Mar.    :  Guda 
Pun.    :  Guda 
Tam.    :  Vellam 
Tel.   :  Bellam 
Urd.   :  Guda 
 
DESCRIPTION -  
 
Light yellow to reddish brown solid, blocks or spherical solid forms or in the form of coarse granules 
(Khandsari); pleasant and characteristic odour; does not show the prese nce of insects, vegetable debris or fibres 
when examined with unaided eyes in daylight. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Loss on Drying                                           :  Not more than 10 per cent (other than that of  
  the liquid or semi-liquid variety), Appendix 2.2.10 
Total ash                                                     :   Not more than 6 per cent,             Appendix 2.2.3 
Acid- insoluble ash                                   : Not more than 0.5 per cent,          Appendix 2.2.4 
Water- insoluble matter                           :   Not more than 2 per cent,             Appendix  2.2.11 
Total sugars                                              :   Not less than 90 per cent,             Appendix  5.1.3.2 
Sucrose                                                      :    Not less than 60 per cent,            Appendix  5.1.7 
Sulphur dioxide concentration                : Not more than 70 ppm,                Appendix  5.1.6 
Heavy metals            :   Complies with API,                       Appendix  2.3 
Microbial limits          :   Complies with API,                      Appendix  2.4 
Pesticide residue         :   Complies with API                       Appendix  2.5 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION -  
 
Rasa   :  Madhura, Pur āna, Havana  
Guna    :  Snigdha, Isatks āriya 
Virya   :  N āti śita 
Vipaka :  Madhura 
Karma :  Sv ādukara, Mintra śodhaka, Rakta śodhaka, N ātipittagita, Kaphavrddhikara,  V ātaghna, 
K¨miv ¨ddhikara, Balya Vrsya, Medov ¨ddhikara 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Sharavarignda, Kumariasava, Madhavasava. 
  CCXLI  THERAPEUTIC USES - Mintrak āra , V ātaroga (Disease due to V ¢ta Do ¾a), Daurbalya (Weakness), Dh ātuksaya 
(Tissue wasting)   
 
DOSE- 5 to 30 g  
 
STORAGE-  Should be stored preferably between 20 to 25 o, away from heat.  
 
Note -           
 
1. Purana Guda:  Guda after one year of its preparation and storage is known as Pur ana Guda and it is 
considered to possess better properties than Guda and also more wholesome.  
2. Prapurana:  Guda after three years of its preparation and storage is known a s Prapuranaguda. It is the best 
one and useful in all diseases; is suitable for preparation of Arista.  
3. Guda stored after preparation for four years should not be used as it l ooses its potency and causes krmi, 
svasa, kasa and other diseases . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXLII  JALA (Potable Water)   
 
DEFINITION- 
 
 Jala is a clear, colourless, odourless liquid, obtained from natural sources such as rai n, river and lakes and 
rendered fit for human consumption; it complies with the standards described below, except w here any special 
requirement is indicated for the Jala to be used.  
 
SYNONYMS- P¢nīya, N īra, Udaka, Salila, Toya, Ambu, Daka, Ambha, Meghapu ¾pa, Salira,                                                      
Apa, V ¢ri, Paya, K īl¢la, Bhuvana, Kabandha, Pu ¾kara, P ¢tha, Varu ´am, Var ¾h¢mbu 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass. : Pani 
Ben. : Jal 
Eng. : Water 
Guj. : Paani 
Hin. : Jala, Paani 
Kan. : Munik 
Mal. : Vellam 
Mar. : Paani 
Ori. : Paani 
Pun. : Paani 
Tam. : Tannir 
Tel. : Neeru, Neellu 
Urd. : Pani 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY & STRENGTH- 
 
Colour (Hazen Units)    - Not more than 5 
Odour      - None 
Taste      - Agreeable and refreshing 
Turbidity(NTU)     - Not more than 5 
pH      - 6.5-8.5,    Appendix, 3.1.3                   
Alkalinity (mg/l)     - Not more than 200 
Total hardness      - Not more than 300 
(as CaCO 3) mg/l 
Iron (as Fe) mg/l     - Not more than 0.3,   Appendix 5.2.5 
Chlorides (as Cl) mg/l     - Not more than 250,  Appendix 5.2.12 
Residual, free      - Not more than 0.2   
Chlorine mg/l 
Dissolved Solids mg/l)     - Not more than 500      
Calcium (as Ca) mg/l    - Not more than 75,  Appendix 5.2.12 
Copper (as Cu) mg/l    - Not more than 0.05,  Appendix 5.2.4 
Manganese (as Mn) mg/l    - Not more than 0.1    
Sulphate (as SO 4) mg/l     - Not more than 200,  Appendix 5.2.12 
Nitrate (as NO 3) mg/l     -  Not more than 45,    
Fluoride (as F) mg/l     - Not more than 1,     CCXLIII  Phenolic Compounds     - Not more than 0.001,  Appendix 5.1.1 
(as C 6H5OH) Mg/l 
Heavy Metals      - Complies with API,  Appendix 2.3 
Arsenic      -Complies with API,  Appendix 2.3.1 
Microbial Limits                                  
Coliform Organisms     - Absent,                                 Appendix 2.4 
E.coli       - Absent 
Pesticides (mg/l)    - Absent ,    Appendix 2.5 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
Rasa : Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu 
Vīrya : Śī ta 
Vip āā āāka : Madhura 
Karma : Āhaladana, Alasyahara, Balya, Buddhiprada, D īpana, Hrdya, Hritvalakara, Kaphahara, 
Klamahara, Medohara, Nidrahara, Pacana, Pathya, Pittasamaka, Rucya , Santarpa ´a, 
Saumya, Śramhara, Tarpa ´a, V ātahara, Visahara, V ¨¾ ya  
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Aºvagandh ¢dyari ¾°a Dr “k¾h“sava Kum ¢ry ¢sava J ¤rak ¢dyari ¾°a 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES – Ajirna (Dyspepsia), Bhr ānti (Mental confusion), Chardi (Emesis), D āha (Burning 
sensation), Krodha (Anger), Moha (Delusion), Mukhaso ¾a (Dryness of mouth), M ūrch ā ( Syncope ), Śo¾a 
(Cachexia), Tandr ā ( Drowsiness ), T ¨¾´ ā ( Thirst ), Vibandha (Constipation), Vi ¾avik āra (Disoreders due to 
poison) 
DOSE- Q.S. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXLIV  KARP ¥¥ ¥¥RA (Natural Camphor)  
 
Karp ¦ra (Natural Camphor) is obtained from the leaves, chipped wood and roots  of Cinnamomum 
camphora  (L.) Nees & Eberm. (Fam. Lauraceae) and whole plant of Ocimum kilimandscharicum Guerke (Fam. 
Lamiaceae) by hydro distillation process.  
 
SYNONYMS-  Ghanas ¢ra, Candra, Him ¢hv ¢, Himab ¢luka, ¹itašiva   
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES - 
 
Ass. : Karpura 
Ben. : Karpur  
Eng. : Camphor 
Guj. : Kapur 
Hin. : Kapur 
Kan. : Karpur 
Mal. : Karpuram, Chutakkapuram 
Mar. : Kaapur 
Ori. : Karpur 
Pun. : Kapura  
Tam. : Karpuram 
Tel. : Karpram, Karpuraamu 
Urd. : Riyaahi Kapphur, Kaaphoraa 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
 Colourless or white crystals, granules or crystalline masses;  odour, penetrating and characteristic; taste, 
pungent, aromatic, and followed by a sensation of cold. Readily pulverisabl e in the presence of a little alcohol (95 
percent), chloroform, or solvent ether. 
 
IDENTITY PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Identification                       -          Volatilises at ordinary temperature and readily burns with a         
                                                           smoky flame.  
Melting Range   -  174 ° to 179 °,    Appendix 3.2.1 
Specific Optical Rotation   -  + 41º + 43º  
    (Synthetic Camphor is the optically  
             inactive, racemic form),   Appendix 3.3.B  
Non-Volatile Matter  -  Not more than 0.05 per cent   
Pesticide residue  -  Complies with API,   Appendix 2.5  
Assay - Camphor contains not less than 96.0 percent of C 10  H 16 O, when analysed as below: 
 
Weigh accurately about 0.2 g and dissolve in 25 ml of aldehyde-free alcohol, in a 300 ml f lask. Slowly add 
while stirring 75 ml of dinitrophenylhydrazine solution and heat on a wate r bath for four hours under reflux. 
Remove alcohol by distillation, allow to cool, dilute to 200 ml with a 2 per cent v/v solution of sulphuric acid. Set 
aside for twenty- four hours, filter in tared Gooch crucible, and wash the precipitate with successive quantities of 
10 ml of cold water until the washings are neutral to litmus paper. Dry to constant weig ht at 80 ° and weigh.   CCXLV  Each g of precipitate is equivalent to 0.458 g of C 10  H 16 O 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
Rasa : Tikta, Ka °u, Madhura 
Guna : Laghu, Tiksna, Snigdha 
Virya : ¹ĩta 
Vipaka : Ka °u 
Karma : Cak ¾u¾ya, Durgandhan ¢saka, H ŕdya, Lekhana, Madak ¢raka, Medya, P ¢cana, 
Trido ¾ahara, Vedan ¢sthapana, Vr ¾ya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Karp ¦ra rasa, Karp ¦r¢sava, Arka Kap ¦ra, Khadir ¢divat ¤, 
M¨dv ¤k¢ri ¾°a 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Ādhm ¢na (Flatulance with gurgling sound), Agnim ¢ndya (Digestive 
impairment), Amav ¢ta (Rheumatism), Aruci (Tastelessness), Atis ¢ra (Diarrhoea), D ¢ha (Burning 
sensation), Dantap ¦ya (Pyorrhoea), Dantaš ¦la (Toothache), Jirnapratišy ¢ya (Chronic sinusitis), Kandu 
(Itching), Kan °haroga (Disease of throat), K ¢sa (Cough), Klaibya (Male impotence), Krmi 
(Helminthiasis/Worm infestation), Kuš °ha (Diseases of skin), Medoroga (Obesity), P ¢rºvaš ¦la 
(Intercoastal neuralgia and pleurodynia), Sandhiš ¦la (Joint pain), Sv ¢sa (Dyspnoea/Asthma), T ¨¾´¢  
(Thirst), Tvakroga (Skin diseases), Vicarcik ¢ (Eczema) , Vi ¾avik ¢ra (Disorders due to poison), Vis ¦cik ¢ 
(Gastro-enteritis with piercing pain), V ¨kkaroga (Renal disorder)  
 
DOSE- 125 to 375 mg. 
 
Note : Karpura (Synthetic)- Synthetic camphor is a racemic mixture and is optically  inactive. The properties of 
synthetic camphor are similar to natural camphor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXLVI  LAVANGA TAILA (Clove Oil)  
 
  Lavanga Taila is the volatile oil obtained by expression  or steam distillation from dried, unopened flower 
buds of Syzygium aromaticum  Merril & Perry Syn. Eugenia caryophyllus  (Spreng) Sprague (Fam. Myrtaceae). 
 
SYNONYMS – Sripras ¦na, Devakusuma  
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES - 
Ass.  : Lavang, Lan, Long 
Beng.  :  Lavang 
Eng. :  Clove 
Guj.  : Lavang, Laving 
Hin. : Lavanga, Laung 
Kan.  :  Lavanga enne 
Kash.  :  Rung 
Mal.  : Karampu, Karayampoovu, Grampu 
Mar.  : Lavang 
Ori. : Labanga 
Punj.  : Laung, Long  
Tam.  : Kirambu Tailam 
Tel.  : Lavangalu 
Urdu  : Qarnful, Laung 
 
DESCRIPTION - 
 
 A colourless or pale yellow aromatic liquid when freshly obtained, becoming darker a nd thicker by ageing 
or on exposure to air; odour and taste characteristic. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Specific gravity  : 1.047-1.060,    Appendix 3.1.2  
Optical rotation  : 0º to –1.5º,     Appendix 3.3.A 
Refractive index   : 1.528 to 1.537,    Appendix 3.3.1  
Weight per ml   : 1.041 to 1.054g,    Appendix 3.1.2 
Microbial limits    : Complies with API,   Appendix 2.4 
 Pesticide residue   : Complies with API,   Appendix 2.5 
Assay- It contains not less than 85% w/v of phenolic substances, chiefly eugenol , C 10 H12 O2 when analysed as 
follows: 
 
   Shake 1ml of oil with 20ml hot water; the water shows not more tha n a scarcely perceptible acid reaction 
with blue litmus paper. Cool the mixture, passed the layer of water through a wetted filter, and treat the clear 
filtrate with one drop of ferric chloride test solution. The mixture has only a transient greyish green colour, but not 
a blue or violet colour. 
 Pipette 10 ml of clove oil in a Cassia flask, the neck of whic h is graduated from 0 to 6 ml at intervals of 
0.1ml. Add 75ml of potassium hydroxide solution. Shake the mixture for five mi n. and heat for ten min. in boiling 
water, shaking the flask at least three times during heating. Cool to room temperature and when liquids have 
completely separated, add sufficient potassium hydroxide solution to rais e the lower level of the oily layer with in 
the graduated portion of the flask. Keep aside for 18 hours and read the v olume of oily layer. Not more than 1.5ml 
of oil separates indicating the presence of not less than 85 percent of w/v of total euge nol. 
  CCXLVII  PROPERTIES AND ACTION - 
 
Rasa   :  Ka °u, Tikta  
Guna    :  Śnigdha, Laghu   
Virya  :  Sita 
Vipaka :  Katu  
Karma  :  Agnikrta, Kaphaghma, Mukhasodhaka, Durgandhanasana, Vaktrakledanasana, 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS – Used as single drug.  
 
THERAPEUTIC USES  – Trsn ā (Thirst), Garbhi ´ichardi (Morning sickness), Dantave ¾taroga (Gingivitis), 
Kaphajanya pi ²a (Pain due to Kapha Dosa) 
 
DOSE  -2 to 6 drops. 
 
STORAGE : Clove oil should be kept in a well-filled, well-closed container, protected from light, and stored at a 
temperature not exceeding 25º.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCXLVIII   
MADHU (Honey) 
 
Madhu is a naturally occurring sweet fluid produced by the honeybees by e nzymatic transformation of 
floral nectar ingested by them and deposited in the cells of hives or combs.  
The Indian species of honeybees belong to the genus Apis  of which the common ones are A. indica , A. 
dorsata  and A. florea  (Fam. Apidae). In commerce, Madhu may be collected from naturally occurring hives in 
groves and forests, by pressing and squeezing in the traditional method or may  be extracted by centrifugation of the 
combs containing honey in artificially maintained apiaries. Both have to be filter ed before storage or use. 
 
SYNONYMS-  Puspasava, Pusparasa, Ksaudra, Madhvika 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
Ass.       : Mahu  
Ben.      : Madhu, Mau 
Eng.      : Honey  
Guj.      : Madh  
Hin.   : Madhu, Sahad  
Kan.     : Jenetuppa  
Mal.     : Then  
Mar.    : Madhu  
Ori.     : Mahu  
Pun.    : Sahad  
Tam.   : Thën  
Tel.     : Ten  
Urd .    : Sahad  
 
DESCRIPTION-   
 
 A thick, syrupy, translucent yellow to yellowish brown fluid; taste sweet with a pleasant odour and flavour.  
When poured on to a tray as a thin layer, no impurities like mould, dirt , beeswax, insect fragments, plant debris or 
any other objectionable foreign matter should be visible to the naked eye in daylight.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH-  
 
Microscopy :-Take about 20 g (or 15 ml) of sample, after stirring the contents wit h a glass rod thoroughly, in a 100 
ml beaker, dilute with about 20 ml of distilled water and stir wit h the glass rod to a homogenous mixture. Transfer 
the same to a centrifuge tube and centrifuge at 3000 rpm for about 5 mi nutes. Remove the tube and carefully 
transfer about 30 ml from the top to a second tube, reserving the sedim ent. Centrifuge similarly the second tube and 
again remove about 25 ml from the top, this time rejecting it. Combi ne the sediments, wash the empty tube with 
about 5 ml of distilled water and add to the combined mixture. Centrifuge  the mixture at about 2000 rpm for about 
two minutes. Pipette off carefully as much of the supernatant without  the sediment getting disturbed. Using a tube 
finely drawn into a capillary, remove small portions from the bottom  of the tube and place in a small drop of 
chloral hydrate solution on a micro slide. Drop a cover slip in place  without mountant exceeding the boundary of 
the cover slip. Prepare several such slides and examine under low a nd high power.  :  Different types of pollen 
grains with differing micromorphology must be present, indicating various source pla nts. 
Test for Adulterant :  1.Cotton wick soaked in honey when ignited burns without crepitating noise or any burnt 
sugar smell,   whereas honey adulterated with sugar or jaggery will give typi cal jaggery or burnt sugar smell on  CCXLIX  burning. 
 
2. Furfural Test - Warm a few drops of honey with concentrated hydrochloric acid, add a few crystals of resorcinol. 
No red colour produced. 
  
Wt. per ml. at 25º     :   Not less than 1.35,                          Appendix 3.1.2 
Moisture content (LOD)       :  Not more than 25 per cent by wt.,   Appendix 2.2.10  
Reducing sugars             :  Not more than 65 per cent by wt.,   Appendix 5.1.3.1 
Sucrose                          :  Not more than 5.0 per cent by wt.,  Appendix 5.1.7 
Fructose-Glucose ratio    :  Not less than 1 per cent by wt.,       Appendix 5.1.7 
Ash                                :  Not more than 0.50 per cent by wt.,Appendix 2.2.3 
Acidity (expressed  as Formic :  Not more than 0.2 per cent by wt.   Appendix 2.2.22 
  acid)             
Fiehe’s Test                   : Negative      Appendix 5.1.4     
Aniline Chloride Test  : Negative      Appendix 5.1.5 
Heavy metals         :  Complies with API,   Appendix 2.3 
Microbial limits     :  Complies with API,   Appendix 2.4 
Pesticide  residue                     :  Complies with API,   Appendix 2.5 
 
PROPERTIES  AND ACTION-  
Rasa : Madhura, Ka ¾āya 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu (Susruta), Guru (Carak), Ruksa, Picchila, Yog āvah ī 
Virya : Śīita 
Vip āka : Ka °u 
Karma : Agnidipana, Cak ºusya, Pittapra ºamana, Pras ¢dana, Ropana, Sandh āna, 
Ślesmaprasamana, Śodhana, Trido ºapra śamana, Vatapittaghna, Vi śaghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATION- Mahdwaasav, Cyavanapra śā, Kutajavaleha.  
THERAPEUTIC USES- Ar śa (Piles), Atis āra (Diarrhoea), Chardi (Emesis), D āha (Burning 
sensation), Hikk ā (Hiccup), K āsa (Cough), K ¨mi (Helminthiasis / Worm infestation), K ¾ata (Wound), 
K¾aya (Pthisis), Ku ¾°ha (Diseases of skin), Medoroga (Obesity), Prameha (Increased f requency and 
turbidity of urine), Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), Raktavik āra (Disorders of blood), Śvāsa (Asthma), 
T¨¾´ā (Thirst), Visavikara (Disorders due to poison)  
 
DOSE- 1 to 10 ml.  
 
STORAGE -  Should be stored preferably at 20 to 25º away from heat; should not be refrigerated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCL  PEPPERMIN ¯- SATVA  (Menthol) 
 
Peppermin °- Satva  is the natural laevo rotatory menthol obtained from various species of Mentha (Fam. 
Lamiaceae). 
 
Other Common Name:  Pipermint 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
 Colourless, hexagonal crystals, usually needle-like, or in fused mass es or crystalline powder; odour, 
pleasant and peppermint-like; taste, warm and aromatic, followed by a cool sensati on. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Acidity or Alkalinity    : A solution in alcohol is neutral to litmus. 
Non-volatile matter      :  Not more than 0.05 per cent,  
Melting range       :  Between 42 ° and 44 °,Appendix 3.2.1  
Specific optical rotation    :  Between -49 ° and -50 °, Appendix 3.3.B  
Congealing range   : Between 27 ° and 28 °; on prolonged stirring the 
                                                                temperature rises between 30 ° and 32 °, Appendix 3.2.2 
Identification-   
 
(A) Dissolve 10 mg in 1 ml of of conc. sulphuric acid and add 1 ml of a 1 per cent w/v solution of vanillin in 
sulphuric acid; an orange-yellow colour is produced; on adding 1 ml of wate r the colour changes to violet 
(distinction from thymol). 
  
(B) Dissolve a few crystals in 1 ml of glacial acetic acid, add three drops of  conc.    
Sulphuric acid and one drop of nitric acid; no green colour is developed (distinction from  thymol) . 
 
(C) When triturated with about an equal amount of camphor, chloral hydrate or     
       Phenol, the mixture liquefies. 
 
Microbial limits     : Complies with API,   Appendix 2.4 
Pesticide residue   : Complies with API,   Appendix 2.5 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
Rasa : Tikta, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Tik ¾´a, Snigdha, Laghu, Vi śada 
Virya : U¾´a 
Vip āka : Ka °u 
Karma : Dipana, Kaphahara, Mukha- śodhana, P ācana, Putihara, Śulapra śamana, 
Uttejaka V ātahara, Vedan āsth āpana 
 
 
 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Used as single drug 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Ajir ´a (Dyspepsia), Danta śū la (Toothache), J īr´a jvara (Chronic fever), 
Kaphaja vikr āa (Disorders due to Kapha Dosa), Mukha -Roga (Diseases of mouth), Udara śula (Pain in the  CCLI  Kaphaja vikr āa (Disorders due to Kapha Dosa), Mukha-Roga (Diseases of mouth), Udar a śula (Pain in the 
abdomen), Śū la (Pain / Colic), Vra ´a (Ulcer) 
 
DOSE- 10 to 30 mg. 
 
STORAGE  -Store in well-closed container at a temperature not above 30 °. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCLII  ŚARKAR Ā (Sugar)  
 
Śarkar ā is a powder prepared from sugarcane juice by open pan process.  
SYNONYMS - Minandi, Matsy ´² ik ā, Sit ¢, Sikt ¢, Sitopal ¢, Sukla, Subhra 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES-  
 
Ass. : Chini 
Ben. : Chini 
Eng. : Sugar  
Guj. : Shaakar 
Hin. : Chini 
Kan. : Sakkare 
Mal. : Panchasara 
Mar. : Sakhara 
Ori. : Chini 
Pun. : Chini 
Tam. : Sarkkarai 
Tel. : Panchadhara, Chekkera 
Urd. : Sakkara 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
  A brown to yellowish brown powder with sweet taste. When a represent ative sample is spread in a thin 
layer, it should be free from dirt, filth, iron filings and similar foreign matter . 
 
IDENTITY PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Moisture content  : Not more than 1.5 percent by wt.,   Appendix 2.2.10 
Acid -Insoluble Ash  : Not more than 0.7 percent by wt.,   Appendix 2.2.4 
Sucrose   : Not more than 93 percent by wt.,    Appendix 5.1.7 
Sulphur dioxide  : Absent,                                             Appendix 5.1.6 
Calcium Oxide  : Not more than 100 (mg/100g),        Appendix 2.3.9 
Heavy Metal   : Complies with API,    Appendix 2.3 
Microbial Limit  : Complies with API,   Appendix 2.4 
Pesticide Residue  : Complies with API,   Appendix 2.5 
Storage   : Should be stored in air tight container. 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
Rasa : Madhura 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Snigdha 
Virya : Sita 
Vip āka : Madhura 
Karma : Cak ¾u¾ya, Dh ¢tuvardhaka, H ¨dya, Pittahara, V ¢tahara, V ¨¾ ya 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Cyavanapra º¢ , V ¢s¢valeha, Kantak ¢ry ¢valeha  CCLIII  THERAPEUTIC USES- Ar śa (Piles), Aruci (Tastelessness), Bhrama (Vertigo), Chardi (Emesis) , D āha 
(Burning sensation), Daurbalya (Weakness), Jvara (Fever), K ¨mi (Helminthiasis / Worm infestation), K ¾ata 
(Wound), K ¾i´a (Impaired), K ¾aya (Mad ātyaya (Alcoholism), Moha (Delusion), M ūrcha (Syncope), 
Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder), Raktasruti (Haemorrage), Raktavik āra (Disorders of blood), Śrama (Fatigue / 
Lethargy), T ¨¾´ ā (Thirst), V ātarakta (Gout), V i¾avik āra (Disorders due to poison)  
 
DOSE- 5  to 30 g. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCLIV  SAR½APA TAILA (Mustard Oil)  
 
Sar ¾apa Taila consists of the fixed oil expressed from clean and healthy  seeds of Brassica campestris  L. 
(Fam. Brassicaceae), cultivated widely in India.  
 
SYNONYMS- Katusneha, Katutaila 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES-  
Ass. : Sariah 
Ben. : Sarishaa 
Eng. : Mustard oil 
Guj. : Sarasiya Tail 
Hin. : Kaduva Taila 
Kan. : Saasve, Saasive 
Mal. : Kadukuenna 
Mar. : Shirsiche Taila 
Ori. : Sorisha Tela 
Pun. : Sarso ka Saka 
Tam. : Kaduguennai  
Tel. : Aavanune  
Urd. : Rogana Sarsafa 
 
 DESCRIPTION-   
 
A pale yellow oil with a slightly pungent recalling sulphurous odour.  
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Specific gravity at 15 0   : 0.9140-0.9206,   Appendix 3.1.2 
Refractive Index at 40 0  : 1.4630-1.4670 ,    Appendix 3.1.1 
Essential Oil Content   : Not less than 0.4%   Appendix 2.2.12 
Acid value      : Not more than 6.0 ,    Appendix 3.9 
Iodine value   : Between115and 125 ,    Appendix 3.8 
Saponification value   : Between 190 and 198 ,    Appendix 3.7   
Unsaponifiable matter   : Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight, Appendix 3.11 
Test for Sulphur   : Positive,     Appendix 5.1.6 
Test for Argemone oil   : Negative,     Appendix 2.2. 
Heavy Metals     : Complies with API ,   Appendix 2.3 
Microbial limits     : Complies with API,   Appendix 2.4 
Pesticide residue    : Complies with API,   Appendix 2.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCLV  PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
Rasa : Tikta, Ka °u 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Snigdha, Tik ¾´ a, Laghu 
Virya : U¾´ a 
Vip āka : Ka °u 
Karma : Dipana, Garbh āś ayottejaka, Kaphara, K ¨mighna, Lekhana, M ūtrajanana, Snehana, Tvacya, 
Vātahara, Vedan āsthapana, Vid āhi 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Unmatta Taila, Panc ānana Taila, Sindur ādya Taila, Jirak ādya Taila, 
Arkaman ªsil ā Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- A¬gamarda (Bodyache), Ar śa (Piles), Dantap ūya (Pyorrhoea), Du ¾°ak ¨mi( Worm 
infestation), Ka ´² u (Itching), Kasanaroga, Kotha (Urticaria), Krmi (Helminthiasis  / Worm infestation), Kustha 
(Diseases of skin), Netraroga (Diseases of eyes), Pliha (S plenic disease), Siroroga (Disease of head), Slipada 
(Filariasis), Svetakushtha (Leucoderma), Tvak roga (Skin diseas e), Vata vikara (Disorder due to V ¢ta Do ¾a), Vrana 
(Ulcer) 
 
DOSE - 5 to 10 ml.  
 
STORAGE- Should be stored in well closed containers away from heat, preferably between 20 to 25 0. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCLVI                                                TAILAPAR ³A TAILA (Eucalyptus Oil)  
 
Tailapar ´a Taila  is the essential oil obtained by steam distillation of the fresh leaves of Eucalyptus globulus  
Labill or from other species of Eucalyptus (Fam. Myrtaceae). 
  
SYNONYMS-  Sugandhapatra taila, Ekalipta, Nilagiri taila, Tailaparna  
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES - 
 
Eng. : Eucalyptus 
Guj. : Nilgiri tail 
Hin. : Nilagiri, Yukeliptus 
Kan. : Nilagiri enne 
Mal. : Nilagiri 
Mar. : Nilagiri 
Ori. : Nilagiri 
Pun. : Eucalyptus 
Tam. : NilagiriTailam 
Tel. : Nilagiri, Eucalyptus 
Urdu : Rogan Eucalyptus 
 
DESCRIPTION- 
 
A colourless to pale-yellow liquid; odour, aromatic and camphoraceous; ta ste, pungent and 
camphoraceous, followed by a cold sensation. 
 
IDENTITY, PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
Wt. per ml at 25º   : 0.901 to 0.920g,    Appendix 3.1.2 
Optical rotation   :   5º to + 10º,     Appendix 3.3 
Refractive Index (at 25º) :  1.457 to 1.469,    Appendix 3.1.1 
Standard                               :          It contains not less than 60.0 per cent w/w of Cineole      
                                                            C10 H18 O,     Appendix 2.2.21 
 
 Identification Test indicating the presence of Phellandrene - Mix 1 ml oil with 2 ml of glacial acetic acid and 5 
ml of light petroleum (b.p/ 60ºto 80º), add 2 ml of a saturated solution of sodium nitrite and shake the mixture 
gently; no crystalline precipitate forms in the apex layer.  
 
Determination of Aldehydes  – Place 10 ml in a glass-stoppered tube about 25 mm. in diameter and 150 mm, long, 
add 5 ml, of benzene and 4 ml of hydroxyammonium chloride reagent in alcohol ( 60 per cent), shake vigorously, 
and titrate immediately with 0.5 N potassium hydroxide in alcohol (60 per cent) until the colour changes to yellow. 
Continue the shaking and neutralizing until the full yellow colour of the  indicator is permanent in the lower layer 
after shaking vigorously for two minutes and allowing separation to take place; the reaction is complete in about 
fifteen minutes. Repeat the operation using a further 10 ml. of the euc alyptus oil and, as the standard for the end-
point, the titrated point of the first determination with the addition of  0.5ml. of 0.5 N potassium hydroxide in 
alcohol (60 per cent). Not more than 2 ml, of N/2 potassium hydroxide in alc ohol (60 per cent) is required in the 
second determination. 
 
  CCLVII  PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
Rasa : Ka °u, Tikta, Kas āya 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, Snigdha 
Virya : U¾´ a 
Vip āka : Ka °u 
Karma 
 : Anulam āna, Dipana, Durgandhan āś aka, Kaphanihs āraka, K¨imighna, Mutrala, P ācana, 
Pratidusaka, P ūtihara, Śulaghna, Svedajanana, Uttejaka, V ātahara, Vedan āsth āpaka, 
Visamajvarapratibandhaka 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Pa ®cagu ´a Taila 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Agnim āndya (Digestive impairment), Am āvata (Rheumatism), B āla pratisyaya 
(Sinusitis in children) , Basti śotha (Cystitis) , Dus ta vrana (Non-healing ulcer) , Jirnap ūyāmeha (Chronic 
pyaemia) , Jvara (Fever), K āsa (Cough), K rmi (Helminthiasis / worm infestation), Pinasa (chronic rhinitis / 
Sinusitis), Pratisy āya (Coryza), Sandhivata (Osteo arthritis) , Sira śū la (Headache), S ūtik ā Jvara (Puerperal 
fever), Śvāsa (Dyspnoea / Asthma), Tvakroga (Skin disease), Yaksm ā (Tuberculosis)  
 
DOSE  – 1 to 5 drops. 
 
STORAGE - Eucalyptus Oil should be kept in well-filled, well-closed container, prote cted from light, and stored in 
cool place. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                         
  CCLVIII                                                                     TILA TAILA (Sesamum Oil)  
 
Tila Taila is a fixed oil expressed from clean and healthy seeds of Sesamum indicum L. (Fam. Pedaliaceae) 
widely cultivated in India. It has light golden colour with pleasant aroma.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DESCRIPTION  –  
 
A light golden colour with pleasant aroma. Slightly soluble in alcohol, miscible with chloroform,  solvent 
ether, light petroleum and with carbon disulphide. Does not solidify when cooled to 0º.  
 
IDENTITY PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Identification : Shake 2 ml with 1 ml of hydrochloric acid  containing 1 per cent w/v solution of sucrose  and allow 
to stand for five minutes; the acid layer acquires a pink colour and changes to red on standi ng 
(distinction from other fixed oils). 
 
 Specific gravity              : 0.9160-0.9190,    Appendix 3.1.2 
Refractive index (at 40º)  : 1.4650 to 1.4665,    Appendix 3.1.1 
Wt. per ml (at 25º)   : 0.916 to 0.921g,    Appendix 3.1.2 
Acid value    : Not more than 2.0,    Appendix 3.9 
Iodine value      : Between 103 and 116,   Appendix 3.8 
Saponification value    : Between 188 and 195,    Appendix 3.7 
Unsaponifiable matter     : Not more than 1.5 per cent,   Appendix 3.11 
Cottonseed oil                  : Absent,    Appendix 2.2.19 
Microbial limits    : Complies with API,   Appendix 2.4             
Pesticide residue               : Complies with API,   Appendix 2.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 SYNONYMS - Taila  
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass. : Tila taila 
Ben. : Tilataila 
Eng. : Sesamum oil, Gingely oil 
Guj. : Tal taila 
Hin. : Til taila, Tilli taila 
Kan. : Ellu, Wollelu 
Mal. : Elluenna 
Mar. : Tila taila 
Ori. : Rasi tel 
Pun. : Tila tail 
Tam. : Nalennai 
Tel. : Nuvvulanune 
Urd. : Rogana taila  CCLIX  PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
Rasa : Madhura 
Anurasa : Tikta, Ka ¾āya 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Snigdha, Guru, Suksma, Vyavayi, Visada, Sara, Vikasi 
Virya : Usna 
Vipaka : Madhura 
Karma : Balya, Cak ¾u¾ya, Dipana, Garbh āś aya Śodhana, Ke śya, Medhya, Sandh āniya, Snehana, 
Stanyajanana, Tvak pras ādana, V ātahara, Vranaropana, Vrana śodhana, V ¨śya 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS- Narayana, Mrhrmara Taila, Bala Taila 
 
THERAPEUTIC USES- Agnidagdha (Accidental burns), Ardita (Facial palsy), Bhagna (Frac ture) , 
Danta śū la (Toothache), Kan ²u (Itching), Karna śū la (Otalgia), K ¨mi (Helminthiasis / Worm infestation), 
Masti ¾ka (Brain tonic), Daurbalya (Weakness) , Pak ¾āgh āta (Paralysis / Hemiplegia), P ūyameha 
(Gonorrhoea), Sira ªśū la (Headache), Sula (Pain), Vatavikara (Disorders due to V ¢ta Do ¾a), Vrana (Ulcer)  
DOSE- 5 to 20 ml. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCLX  YAV ¡NĪ SATVA (Thymol)  
 
Yav ¢nī satva (Thymol) is a crystalline phenolic component, chemically 2 -isopropyl-5-methylphenol) 
obtained from the volatile oil of Thymus vulgaris  L. and Trachyspermum ammi  (L.) Sprague (Fam. Lamiaceae) 
 
SYNONYMS- Yam āni ghanasara 
 
REGIONAL LANGUAGE NAMES- 
 
Ass. : Ajaina satva 
Ben. : Yamaani sattva 
Eng. : Thymol 
Guj. : Yavaan sara, Javaain sara 
Hin. : Ajvayana sat, Ajavaan phulla 
Mar. : Ovaa phul 
Ori. : Juaani saram 
Pun. : Ajvaayan kaa Sat 
Tel. : Vaamu satva 
Urd. : Sat-ajavayan 
 
DESCRIPTION-  
 
Colourless crystals or white, crystalline powder; odour; pungent and ar omatic, thyme like; taste, pungent 
and aromatic. 
 
Identification : A solution in alcohol (90 per cent)  is optically inactive. 
 
 Heat 1 g of the test sample in a test-tube in a water-bath w ith 5 ml of a 10 per cent w/v solution of sodium 
hydroxide  a clear, colourless or pale-red solution is formed which becomes dark er on standing, but no oily drops 
are separated. On adding a few drops of chloroform  and agitating the mixture, a violet colour is produced. 
 
 Dissolve a small crystal of the test sample in 1 ml of gl acial acetic acid  and add 6 drops of  sulphuric acid  
and 1 drop of nitric acid; the liquid shows a deep bluish-green colour when viewed by reflected l ight. 
 
 It sinks in cold water and, when the temperature is raised to about 45 0, it melts and rises to the surface. 
 
IDENTITY PURITY AND STRENGTH- 
 
Melting range   : Between 48º and 51ºC,    Appendix 3.2.1 
Non-volatile matter  : Not more than 0.05 per cent 
Acidity or Alkalinity : A 4.0 w/v solution in alcohol (50 per cent)  is neutral to         
  litmus solution.  
Assay : Thymol contains not less than 99 percent of C 10 H14 O, when analysed as below: 
 
Weigh accurately about 0.1 g, transfer to an iodine flask and dissolve  in 25 ml of 1N sodium hydroxide . 
Add 20 ml of hot dilute hydrochloric acid  and immediately titrate with 0.1 N bromine  (1 to 2 ml). Warm the 
solution to about 75º, add two drops of methyl orange solution  and continue the titration slowly, swirling 
vigorously after each addition, When the colour of the methyl orange is  bleached, add two drops of 0.1 N bromine,   CCLXI  shake well, add one drop of methyl orange  solution  and shake vigorously. If the solution is red, continue the 
titration, drop wise and with shaking until the red colour does not appear. Repeat the alternate addition of 0.1 N 
bromine and methyl orange solution  until the red colour is discharged after the addition of the methyl or ange 
solution.  
 
Each ml of 0.1 N bromine  is equivalent to 0.003755 g of C 10 H14 O. 
Microbial limits   -  Complies with API,   Appendix 2.4 
Pesticide residue   -  Complies with API,    Appendix 2.5 
 
PROPERTIES AND ACTION-  
Rasa : Ka °u, Tikta 
Gu ´´ ´´a : Laghu, Ruksa, Tiksna 
Virya : U¾´ a 
Vip āka : Ka °u 
Karma : Dipana, Lekhana, P ācana, Partidusaka, Slesmaghna, Sulghna, Uttejaka, V ātanulomana, 
Vedan śamaka, Visaghna 
 
IMPORTANT FORMULATIONS-  
THERAPEUTIC USES- Ajir ´a (Dyspepsia), ¡mav āta (Rheumatism), ¡nāha (Distension of abdomen due to 
obstruction to passage of urine and stool), A ¬ku śa k ¨mi (Hookworms) , Aruci (Tastelessness), B ālātis āra 
(Infantile diarrhoea), Chardi (Emesis), Danta ś¦la (Toothache), Gulma (Abdominal lump), Krm (Helminthiasis 
/ Worm infestation), M ¦trakrcchra (Dysuria), Plihodara (Splenomegaly), Sandhi ś¦la , Śirah śula (Headache), 
Tvakroga (skin disease), Udara (Diseases of abdomen), Udara ś¦la (Pain in the abdomen), V ātar śa (Dry piles), 
Vis ¦cik ā (Gastro-entritis with piercing pain) 
 
DOSE: 25 to 125 mg. 
 
STORAGE: Store in tightly-closed, light-resistant containers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCLXII   
CONTRIBUTING LABORATORIES & INSTITUTIONS 
 
1. B.V. Patel Pharmaceutical Education & Research Development Centre, Ahmedaba d. 
           (Dr. (Mrs). M.Rajani)  
  
2. Captain Srinivasa Murti Drug Research Institute for Ayurveda (CSMDRIA ), Chennai. 
(Dr. (Ms.) A. Saraswathy)  
 
3. Central Council  for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha (CCRAS), New Delhi 
(Dr. V.K. Lal) 
 
4. Central Research Institute of Unani Medicine, Hyherabad 
(Dr. Sheikh Imam)  
 
5. Govt. Drug Testing Laboratory, Joginder Nagar 
(Dr. Arjun Singh Kharwal)  
 
6. IPGTRA Gujarat Ayurveda University, Jamnagar 
(Dr. Subrata De) 
 
7. National Botanical Research Institute (CSIR), Lucknow. 
(Dr. (Mrs) Shanta Mehrotra, Dr. A.K.S. Rawat, Adarsh Kumar Agnihotri, Miss. Vartik a Rai, 
Miss. Manisha Agarwal and Madan Mohan Pandey) 
 
8. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research, SAS Nagar 
(Dr. K.K. Bhutani) 
 
9. Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine (PLIM), Ghaziabad. 
(Dr. D.R. Lohar, Dr. Rajeev Kr. Sharma, Ravindra Singh and C. Arunachalam)  
  
10. Tropical Botanic Garden and Research Institute (TBGRI), Thiruvanathapuram.  
(Dr. S. Rajasekharan, Dr. V. George, Dr. Mathav Dass, M. Navas, J. Ushakumari and S.R. 
Rajani Kurup) 
 
11. University Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Punjab University, Cha ndigarh. 
(Prof. Karan Vasisht) 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCLXIII   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  CCLXIV   CCLXV  APPENDIX-1 
 
1.1 APPARATUS FOR TESTS AND ASSAYS 
 
1.1.1 -Nessler Cylinders 
 
Nessler cylinders which are used for comparative tests are ma tched tubes of clear colourless glass 
with a uniform internal diameter and flat, transparent base. They c omply with Indian Standard 4161-
1967. They are of transparent glass with a nominal capacity of 50 ml. The overall height is about 150 
mm, the external height to the 50 ml mark 110 to 124 mm, the thickness of the wall 1.0 to 1.5 mm and t he 
thickness of the base 1.5 to 3.0 mm. The external height to the 50 ml mar k of the cylinder used for a test 
must not vary by more than 1 mm. 
 Sieves for pharmacopoeial testing are constructed from wire clot h with square meshes, woven 
from wire of brass, bronze, stainless steel or any other suitable material. The wires should be of uniform 
circular cross-section and should not be coated or plated. There must be no reaction between the material 
of the sieve and the substance being sifted. 
 
Sieves conform to the following specifications – 
 
Approximate sieve number* Nominal mesh aperture size Tolerance average aper ture size 
     mm           ± mm 
 
 4    4.0            0.13 
 6    2.8            0.09 
 8    2.0            0.07 
 10    1.7            0.06 
 12    1.4            0.05 
 16    1.0            0.03 
 --    µm            ±µm 
 22              710               25   
 25              600               21 
 30              500               18 
 36              425               15 
        44              355               13 
            60              250          3(9.9) ** 
 85              180          11(7.6) 
 100              150          9.4(6.6) 
 120              125          8.1(5.8) 
 150              106          7.4(5.2) 
 170     90          6.6(4.6) 
 200    75          6.1(4.1) 
 240    63          5.3(3.7) 
 300    53          4.8(3.4) 
 350    45          4.8(3.1) 
 
  * Sieve  number is the number of meshes in a length of 2.54 cm. in each transverse direction parallel  to the wires.  CCLXVI   
** Figures in brackets refer to close tolerances, those without brackets relat e to full tolerances. 
 
1.1.3. -Thermometers un  Toi di lang thang lan trong bong toi buot gia, ve dau khi da mat em roi? Ve dau khi 
bao nhieu mo mong gio da vo tan... Ve dau toi biet di ve dau?   
 http://www.freewebtown.com/gaigoisaigon/    
 
 
 
Toi di lang thang lan trong bong toi buot gia, ve dau khi da mat em roi?  Ve dau khi bao nhieu mo mong gio da vo 
tan... Ve dau toi biet di ve dau?    http://www.freewebtown.com/gaigoisaigon/    
 
Toi di lang thang lan trong bong toi buot gia, ve dau khi da mat em roi?  Ve dau khi bao nhieu mo mong gio da vo 
tan... Ve dau toi biet di ve dau?    http://www.freewebtown.com/gaigoisaigon/    
Indian Standard 4825-1968 and are standardised in accordance with the ‘Indian St andard Method of Calibrating 
Liquid-in-Glass Thermometers’, 6274-1971. 
 
 The thermometers are of the mercury-in-glass type and are fille d with a dried inert gas, preferably nitrogen. 
They may be standardised for total immersion or for partial imme rsion. Each thermometer should be employed 
according to the condition of immersion under which it was standardised. I n the selection of the thermometer it is 
essential to consider the conditions under which it is to be used. 
 
1.1.4. –Ultra-Violet Lamp (For general purposes and for chromatography work) 
 
 An instrument consisting of mercury vapour lamp and a filter which g ives an emission band with 
maximum intensity at about 254 nm (near UV rays) and 366 nm (far UV rays) is used. To ensure that the required 
emission is being given by the lamp, carry out the following test periodically.  
Apply to a plate coated with silica gel G, 5 µl of a 0.04 per cent w/v solution of  sodium  salicylate in  
ethanol (95%)  for lamps of maximum output at 254 nm and 5 µl of a 0.2 per cent w/v solution in ethanol (95%) for 
lamps of maximum output at 365 nm. Examine the spot in a position normal to the radiati on. The distance between 
the lamp and the plate under examination used in a pharmacopoeial test s hould not exceed the distance used to 
carry out the above test. 
 
1.1.5. -Volumetric Glassware 
 
Volumetric apparatus is normally calibrated at 27 0. However, the temperature generally specified for 
measurements of volume in the analytical operations of the pharmacopoe ia, unless otherwise stated, is 25 0. The 
discrepancy is inconsequential as long as the room temperature in the  laboratory is reasonably constant and is 
around 27 0. 
 
Pharmacopoeial assays involving volumetric measurements require the use of accurately calibrated 
glassware. Volumetric apparatus must be suitably designed to assur e accuracy. The design, construction and 
capacity of volumetric glassware should be in accordance with those  laid down by the Bureau of Indian Standards. 
The tolerances on capacity for volumetric flasks, pipettes and bure ttes, as laid down in the relevant Indian 
Standards, are permisibile. 
 
1.1.6. -Weights and Balances  
 
 Pharmacopoeial tests and assays require the use of analytical balances that vary in capacity, 
sensitivity and reproducibility. The accuracy needed for a weighing s hould dictate the type of balance.  CCLXVII  Where substances are to be “accurately weighed”, the weighing is  to be performed so as to limit the error 
to not more than 0.1 per cent. For example, a quantity of 50 mg is to be w eighed to the nearest 0.05 mg; a 
quantity of 0.1 g is to be weighed to the nearest 0.1 mg; and quantity of 10 g is to be weighed to the 
nearest 10 mg. A balance should be chosen such that the value of three ti mes the standard deviation of the 
reproducibility of the balance, divided by the amount to be weighed, does not exceed 0.001. 
 
1.1.7. -Muslin Cloth 
 
 Muslin cloth is a cotton fabric where warp is 22 per cm±1 and weft is 18 ±1 per centimet er. 
 
Method: Take a cardboard or an aluminium plate with a centimeter square ope ning. Keep the plate on the cloth to 
be used, so that the edges on the X or Y axis coincides with a warp or  weft yarn in the fabric.Count the number of 
the threads of both warp and weft within the opening. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCLXVIII  APPENDIX - 2 
 
2.1 TESTS AND DETERMINATIONS 
 
2.1.1. - Microscopic Identification  
 
 Microscopic identification of the botanical ingredients is a standar d for statutory purposes in several solid 
and semi-solid compound formulations. Microscopic identification tests ar e confined to those formulations where 
the botanical ingredients are not more than ten , and where they are added ‘in situ’  in powder form as ‘ Praksepa 
Dravy ¢s’ . Such comminuted ingredients lend themselves for microscopic identifi cation, as they are not drastically 
changed in cell structure or contents while processing, and appear inta ct in microscopic slide preparations, after 
proper treatment. 
 
 Appropriate processing for separation and isolation of botanical debris from a formulation without loss of 
debris, by hand picking, shifting, washing, sedimentation, density separati on or by floatation etc., are the 
preliminary steps. This is followed by clearing the debris in chem ical reagents, reacting it with suitable reagents 
and stains and finally mounting a little part on a slide in a medium  of suitable refractive index (see later part) that 
helps to show the unit structures in good relief.  Identification of the  discrete, but disoriented units from the 
botanical ingredients in a formulation will not be possible without proper isolation, and should not  be attempted. 
 
 Monographs where the test is prescribed give both a relevant met hod of isolation and diagnostic features 
specific to the expected ingredients in that formulation.  Only a bri ef method and a few of the characteristics for 
each ingredient are given, but an analyst may use other methods of i solation and choose more characteristics to 
draw a correct conclusion. 
 
 Although monographs prescribe standards only for the ‘ Praksepa Dravyas’, characteristics from other 
ingredients that are processed into extracts or decoctions prior to t heir addition to a formulation may also be seen in 
a slide preparation, giving rise to recognisable unique characteris tics. In addition, cell or tissue structures common 
to several ingredients added to a formulation, and therefore not specif ic to any one of them, would also be present. 
Caution should therefore be exercised so that such features are not cons trued as parts from adulterants or 
substitutes or foreign parts.  Proper study of the individual ingredient s using authentic material and reference to 
their monographs in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia for Single Drugs would help avoid errors of this nature.  Skill in 
the recognition of discrete and disoriented tissue components and the knowl edge required to ascribe them to their 
correct source should be acquired by the analyst. 
 
Stains and Reagents for Microchemical Reactions  
  
The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia volumes on single drugs already include m icrochemical reactions for ergastic 
substances and may be consulted in addition to the following for use on isolated debris: 
 
Acetic acid:  Dilute 6 ml of glacial acetic acid with 100 ml of distilled w ater; used for identification of cystoliths, 
which dissolve with effervescence. 
 
Aniline chloride solution:  Dissolve 2 g in a mixture of 65 ml of 30 per cent ethyl alcohol and 15 ml dist illed water 
and add 2 ml of conc. Hydrochloric acid .  Lignified tissues are stained bright yellow. 
 
Bismarck brown:  Dissolve 1 g in 100 ml of 95 per cent of ethyl alcohol; used as a general stain for macerated 
material (with Schultze’s). 
 
Breamer’s reagent:  Dissolve 1 g of sodium tungstate and 2 g of sodium acetate in suffi cient quantity of water to 
make 10 ml yellowish to brown precipitates; indicate the presence of tannin.  CCLXIX     
Chlorinated soda solution (Bleaching solution):  Dissolve 75 g of sodium carbonate in 125 ml of distilled water; 
triturate 50 g of chlorinated lime (bleaching powder) in a mortar w ith 75 ml of distilled water, adding it little by 
little.  Mix the two liquids and shake occasionally for three or four  hours.  Filter and store, protected from light.  
Used for lighting highly coloured material, by warming in it and washing the tissues thoroughly.  
 
Canada balsam (as a Mountant):  Heat Canada balsam on a water bath until volatile matter is removed and the 
residue sets to a hard mass on cooling.  Dissolve residue in xylene to form a thin syrupy liquid.  Used for making 
permanent mounts of reference slides of selected debris.  
 
Chloral hydrate solution:  Dissolve 50 g of chloral hydrate in 20 ml of distilled water.  A valuable clarifying agent 
for rendering tissues transparent and clear, by freeing them from most of the ergastic substances, but leaving 
calcium oxalate crystals unaffected.  
 
Chloral iodine:  Saturate chloral hydrate solution with iodine, leaving a few crys tals undissolved; useful for 
detecting minute grains of starch otherwise undetectable.   
 
Chlorziniciodine (Iodinated zinc chloride solution):  Dissolve 20 g of zinc chloride and 6.5 g of potassium iodide 
in 10 ml of distilled water.  Add 0.5 g of iodine and shake for about fift een minutes before filtering.  Dilute if 
needed prior to use.  Renders cellulosic walls bluish violet and lignified walls yellowish brown to brown. 
 
Chromic acid solution:  10 g of dissolved in 90 ml of dilute sulphuric acid:  macerating agent similar to 
Schultze’s. 
 
Corallin soda:  Dissolve 5 g of corallin in 100 ml of 90 per cent ethyl alcohol.  Dis solve 25 g of sodium carbonate 
in 100 ml distilled water; keep the solutions separate and mix when r equired, by adding 1 ml of the corallin 
solution to 20 ml of the aqueous sodium carbonate solution.  Prepare fresh ea ch time, as the mixture will not keep 
for long.  Used for staining sieve plates and callus bright pink and imparts a reddish ti nge to starch grains and 
lignified tissues. 
 
Ammoniacal solution of Copper oxide (Cuoxam):  Triturate 0.5 g of copper carbonate in a mortar with 10 ml of 
distilled water and gradually add 10 ml of strong solution of ammonia ( sp. gr. 0.880) with continued stirring; used 
for dissolving cellulosic materials.   
 
Eosin:  1 per cent solution in 90 per cent ethyl alcohol; stains cellulose and aleurone grains red.  
 
Ferric chloride solution: A per cent solution ferric chloride in distilled water.  Taninn containing tissues coloured 
bluish or greenish black. 
 
Glycerin:  Pure or diluted as required with one or two volumes of distilled water.  Used as a general mountant. 
 
Haematoxylin, Delafield’s:  Prepare a saturated solution of ammonia alum.  To 100 ml of this add a solution of 1 g 
of Haematoxylin in 6 ml of ethyl alcohol (97 per cent).  Leave the m ixed solution exposed to air and light in an 
unstopped bottle for three or four days.  Filter and add to the filtrate 25 ml of glycerin and 25 ml  of methyl alcohol.  
Allow the solution to stand exposed to light, till it acquires a dark colour (about two months).  Refilter and store as 
a stock solution.  Dilute it 3 or 4 times volumes with distilled w ater.  Stains cellulosic fibers blue; used only on 
water washed material. 
 
Iodine water:  Mix 1 volume of decinormal iodine with 4 volumes of distilled water.  Stains starch blue, and 
reveals crystalloids and globoids when present in aleurone grains. 
  CCLXX  Iodine and Potassium iodide solution:  Dissolve 1 g of potassium iodide  in 200 ml of distilled water and 2 g of 
iodine; stains lignified walls yellow and cellulosic walls blue. 
 
Lactophenol (Amman’s Fluid):  Phenol  20 g, lactic acid  20 g, glycerin  40 g, distilled water  20 ml dissolve; 
reveals starch grains in polarised light with a well marked cross at hi lum, and also minute crystals of calcium 
oxalate as brightly polarising points of light.  
 
Methylene blue:  A solution in 25 ml of ethyl alcohol  (95 per cent). A general stain for nucleus and bacteria. 
 
Millon’’s reagent: Dissolve 1 volume of mercury in 9 volumes of fuming nitric acid (s p. Gr. 1.52), keeping the 
mixture well cooled during reaction. Add equal volume distilled water when cool. Stains proteins red. 
 
Naphthol solution : Dissolve 10 g of Naphthol in 100 ml of ethyl alcohol ; a specific stain for detection of inulin; 
cells containing inulin turn deep reddish violet. 
 
Pholorglucinol:  1 g of phloroglucinol  dissolved in 100 ml of 90 per cent ethyl alcohol ; mount debris in a few 
drops, allow to react for a minute, draw off excess of reagent wit h a filter paper strip, and add a drop of conc. 
hydrochloric acid to the slide; lignified tissues acquire a deep purplish red colour; very effective on water washed 
material but not in chloral hydrate washed debris. 
 
Picric acid solution (Trinitrophenol Solution):  A saturated aqueous solution made by dissolving 1 g of picric 
acid in 95 ml of distilled water; stains animal and insect tissues, a light to deep yellow; in a solution wit h ethyl 
alcohol, aleurone grains and fungal hyphae are stained yellow. 
 
Potash, Caustic:  A 5 per cent aqueous solution ; used to separate tenacious tissues of epidermis and also 
laticiferous elements and vittae, both of which are stained brown. 
 
Ruthenium red:  Dissolve 0.008 g of ruthenium red in 10 ml of a 10 per cent solution of lead ace tate; (to be freshly 
prepared) used for identification of most kinds of mucilage containing tissues, which t urn pink. A 0.0008 g 
ruthenium red dissolved in 10 ml of distilled water and used immediately stains cuticular tissues in debris to a light 
pink . 
 
Safranin: A 1 per cent solution in ethyl alcohol 50 per cent; used to stain lignified cell walls deep red, even after 
clearing with choral hydrate. 
 
Schultze’s Maceration fluid:  Add isolated debris to 50 per cent conc. nitric acid  in a  test tube and warm over 
water  bath: add a few crystals of potassium chlorate  while warming, till tissues soften; cool, wash with water 
thoroughly and tease out for mounting hard tissues; isolated cell structures are clearly revealed, but the structures 
are not useful for measurement of dimensions . 
 
Sudan Red III:  Dissolve 0.01 g of sudan red III in 5 ml of ethyl alcohol  (90 per cent) and 5 ml of pure glycerin ; 
suberised walls of cork cells, and fatty material in cells are stained bright red.. 
 
Sulphovanadic acid  (Mandelin’s reagent):  Triturate 1 g of ammonium vandate with 100 ml conc. s ulphuric acid .  
Allow the deposit to subside and use the clear liquid.  This is to be prepared fresh; useful for identification of 
alkaloids, particularly strychnine which turns violet in the cells containing it. 
  CCLXXI   Refractive Indices of Certain Mountants 
 
Water  1.333 
Lactophenol 1.444 
Chloral Hydrate solution 1.44 to 1.48 
Olive oil 1.46 to 1.47 
Glycerol 1.473 
Castor oil 1.48 
Clove oil 1.53 
Cresol 1.53 
Cassia oil 1.6 
Xylol 1.49 
Alcohol 1.36 
Chloroform 1.44 
 
 
2.1.2. Microscopical Methods of Examining Crude Vegetable Drugs 
 
Methods of preparing specimens of crude materials of vegetable drug s for microscopical studies vary, 
depending on the morphological groups of drugs to be examined and also on the natur es of the material i.e., entire, 
cut or powdered. 
 
I. LEAVES, HERBS AND FLOWERS 
 
For examining leaves, herbs and flowers (entire or cut) under micros cope, following methods are 
employed for clarification: 
 
A. Entire and cut materials 
 
(i) Entire materials  – When examining entire leaves, herbs and flowers, take pieces of leaf (margin and 
vein of leaves only), herbs (only leaf) and flowers (only calyx and corolla) in test tube. Add a solution of caustic 
alkali or nitric acid to the test tube and boil for 1-2 minutes, pour t he contents into a porcelain dish, drain off the 
liquid, wash the material with water and leave for sometimes. R emove the pieces of the material from the water 
with a spatula and put on the slide, add a few drops of the solution of gly cerol or chloral hydrate. Crush the 
material with scalpel and cover with cover slip before examining. 
 
(ii) Cut materials  – For examining cut leaves, herbs and flowers, take several piec es in a test tube and 
employ the same methods as described for entire materials. 
 
Other methods employed for clarification of the material (leaf and stem) are  described below :- 
 
(a) Leaf  – Boil pieces of leaves in a test tube with chloral hydrate for  several minutes until completely 
clarified and then examine them in chloral hydrate solution. After cl arification, leaf pieces are divided into two 
parts with the help of a scalpel or needle, and carefully turn one par t. The leaf can be examined from both the 
dorsal and ventral surfaces. 
 
(b) Stem  – To examine stem material (without leaf) boil pieces in a sol ution of caustic alkali or in nitric 
acid. Remove the epidermis with a scalpel or a needle for examini ng the surface. For examining pressed specimen 
of stem, take separate tissue and press them with a scalpel on the slide. 
  CCLXXII  B. Powder 
 
For examining characters of the powder take sufficient amount of powde r in Chloral-hydrate solution on a 
slide and cover it with a cover slip, warm over a low flame for a short time. 
 
II. FRUITS AND SEEDS 
 
A. Entire materials 
 
For microscopical examination of fruit and seed take the specimens or outer coat of seed or fruit 
and examine as described below : 
 
(i) Outer Coat  – For examining the outer coat boil 3 or 4 seeds or fruits in caustic  alkali solution in a test 
tube for 1-2 minutes (outer coat specimens with intensive pigmentation are boiled f or longer period). After boiling, 
place the pieces on slide, remove the layers of the coat and examine them after mounti ng in glycerol solution. 
 
(ii) Section  – If fruits or seeds are too hard to cut then boil them for 15-30 minute s or more depending on 
their hardness or keep them in moistening chamber or absorb in water and chloroform solution or soften them with 
stem and then cut the specimen for examining purpose. For cutting small , flat seeds (which are difficult to hold) 
place them in a pith or potato slit for section cutting. Small, round or smooth seeds cannot be cut  into section in the 
pith, then in such cases, they may be embedded in paraffin wax blocks for  section cutting. For this, a block of 
paraffin (0.6 × 0.5 × 1.5 cms. in size) is made and the seed is embedded in the block by making a cavity or a pit in 
the block with a hot teasing needle. Cut the section with a sharp ra zor (through the object) together with the 
paraffin, place them on to the slide, remove paraffin with a needle or wash it with xylene and examine the section 
in chloral-hydrate solution. 
 
B. Powder 
 
For examining the structure of the cells of the seed coat and the c ells of the embryo take a small amount of 
powder of the material on a slide in glycerol and cover it with a cover slip and examine . 
 
1. Starch  – For examining the presence of starch in the seed, take two speci mens, one in iodine solution and the 
other in water. With iodine solution starch turns blue. Shape and the struc ture of starch grains can be seen in water 
and their size is measured. 
 
 When examining objects containing starch, prepare specimen by slightl y warming in chloral-hydrate 
solution. 
 
2. Fixed Oil  – For examining the presence of fixed oil, prepare a specimen in a s olution of Sudan III droplets of 
fixed oil are coloured orange pink. When examining objects containing smal l amount of fixed oil, prepare a 
specimen by slightly warming in chloral-hydrate solution, and when exam ining objects containing large amount of 
fixed oil, then the powder is de-fatted and clarified as follows: 
 
Place 0.5 g. of the powder in a porcelain dish, add 5-10 ml. of dilute nitric acid 
and boil for 1 minute, then strain off the liquid through a cloth, wash the r esidue with hot water and return it to the 
porcelain dish with a spatula, boil it with 5-10 ml of caustic alka li solution for 1 minute and again strain it through 
the cloth and wash with water. Examine the residue in a glycerol s olution, after the treatment the structure of the 
layers of the coat and their cells can be seen very distinctly. 
 
3. Mucilage  – Prepare a specimen in Ruthenium Red and examine it under a low power  microscope or under 
dissecting microscope. Mucilage appears as pinkish-red or yellow coloured masse s.  CCLXXIII   
III. BARKS 
 
A. Entire material 
 
Prepare transverse or longitudinal section of bark. To soften bark br eak it into pieces of about 1-2 cm long 
and 0.5-1 cm wide and boil with in a test tube for 1-3 minutes. Soft pieces are then str aightened with a scalpel so as 
to have a exact transverse or longitudinal direction. Cut the section with r azor, moisten the surface of the bark with 
glycerol solution. Remove the sections with a brush and place them on t he slide. Thin pieces of the bark are cut by 
placing them in the pith (potato or carrot). The sections are treated with various re agents before examining. 
 
1. Lignified elements  – For testing lignin add several drops of phloroglucinol and a drop of conce ntrated 
hydrochloric acid to the section on a slide then draw off the liquid, imm erse the section in chloral hydrate solution 
and cover with a cover slip (the specimen should not be heated); the l ignified elements are coloured crimson. 
Phloroglucinol can be substituted by saffranine, and the lignified eleme nts are coloured pink. The excessive stain 
can be washed out with acidified alcohol. 
 
2. Starch  – Starch is detected by treating with iodine solution. 
 
3. Tannin  –Tannin is detected by treating with ferric ammonium sulphate solut ion (blue-black or green black 
colour shows the presence of Tannin) or with potassium-bichromate solution (brown colour indicates the presence 
of Tannin). 
 
4. Anthraquinone derivatives  –Anthraquinone derivatives are detected by treating with alkali solution (blood-red 
colour shows the presence of  anthraquinone derivatives). 
 
B. Cut materials 
 
Prepare small pieces or scraping of bark and boil them for 3-5 mi nutes in a solution of caustic alkali or 
potassium hydroxide or in nitric acid solution and then mount in glycerin for examination on a slide  covered with a 
cover slip. 
 
C. Powder 
 
Prepare specimen for examination by placing a little amount of powder  on a slide, add 1-2 drops of 
phloroglucinol and a drop of concentrated hydrochloric acid, cover it with a cover slip, draw off the liquid from 
one side of the slide with filter paper, and then apply 1-2 drops of chlora l-hydrate solution from the other side of 
the slide, lignified elements are stained crimson-red. Specimen m ay also be prepared with caustic alkali or ferric 
ammonium sulphate for this purpose. 
 
IV. ROOTS AND RHIZOMES 
 
A. Entire materials 
 
For anatomical examination of entire roots and rhizomes cut transver se and longitudinal sections. For this, 
soften small pieces of roots without heating in glycerol solution for  1-3 days, depending on their hardness. The 
softened roots are straightened with the help of a scalpel in the right direct ion and then cut a section with the razor. 
First, cut thicker entire slices and then make thin, smaller s ections. Stain the entire slices with phloroglucinol and 
concentrated hydrochloric acid or with safranin examine the specimen unde r a dissecting microscope. For micro-
chemical test the small and thin sections are examined under microscope, as follows : 
  CCLXXIV  1. Starch  – Starch is detected with iodine solution. For this, prepare specimen with water to mea sure the granule of 
starch with an occular micrometer. 
 
2. Inulin  –Inulin is detected with Molish’s reagent. For this place a litt le powder on a slide and apply 1-2 drops of 
naphthol and a drop of concentrated sulphuric acid, if inulin is present, the pow der will appear reddish-violet 
coloured. Starch also gives this test, so the test for inulin can be done in the absence of st arch. 
 
3. Lignified elements  –Lignified elements (fibrovascular bundles, mechanical tissue etc .) are detected with 
phloroglucinol and concentrated hydrochloric acid or safranine solution as mentioned above for ba rks. 
 
4. Fixed oil  –For fixed oil detection use Sudan IV, as mentioned above for fruits and seeds. 
 
If required for tannin, anthraquinone derivatives test as mentioned above. 
 
B. Cut material 
 
Make small pieces or scrapping of roots or rhizomes and boil them for 3-5 minutes  in caustic alkali, or in nitric 
acid and then make pressed specimen and immerse them in glycerol. 
 
Microchemical tests can be performed with scrapings for various chemicals a s mentioned above. 
 
C. Powder 
 
Prepare several specimens of the powder on slides in chloral hydrat e solution and perform the above mentioned 
standard tests for detection of starch, fixed oil, inulin, lignified el ements, anthraquinone derivatives, tannins, 
mucilage, etc. 
 
2.1.3. Types of Stomata 
 
There are several types of stomata, distinguished by the form and arrangement of the surrounding cells. 
The following descriptions apply to mature stomata. 
 
1. Anomocytic (irregular-celled)  –Previously known as ranunculaceous. The stoma is surrounded by a varying  
number of cells in no way differing form those of the epidermis generally. 
 
2. Anisocytic (unequal-celled)  –Previously known as cruciferous or  solanaceous. The stoma is usuall y 
surrounded by three subsidiary cells, of which one is markedly smaller than the others.  
 
3. Diacytic (cross-celled)  –previously known as caryophyllaceous. The stoma is accompanied by two subsidiary 
cells whose common wall is at right angles to the guard cells. 
 
4. Paracytic (parallel-celled)  –Previously known as rubiaceous. The stoma has one each side one or more  
subsidiary cells parallel to the long axis of the pore and guard cells. 
 
2.1.4. Determination of Stomatal Index 
 
The stomatal index is the percentage of the number of stomata forme d by the total number of epidermal 
cells, including the stomata, each stoma being counted as one cell. 
 
Place leaf fragments of about 5 × 5 mm in size in a test tube containing about 5 ml of chloral hydrate 
solution and heat in a boiling water-bath for about 15 minutes or until the fragments become transparent. Transfer a  CCLXXV  fragment to a microscopic slide and prepare the mount, the lower epide rmis uppermost, in chloral hydrate solution 
and put a small drop of glycerol-ethanol solution on one side of the cover- glass to prevent the preparation from 
drying. Examine with a 40x objective and a 6x eye piece, to which a mic roscopical drawing apparatus is attached. 
Mark on the drawing paper a cross (x) for each epidermal cell and a circle (o) for each stoma. Calculate the result 
as follows: 
 
                                 S x 100 
Stomatal index = ——————  
                                 E + S 
Where 
 S = the number of stomata in a given area of leaf ; and 
 E = the number of epidermal cells (including trichomes) in the same area of leaf.  
 
 
                       
  
 
                                       Fig. 1 Various types of stomata 
 
For each sample of leaf make not fewer than ten determinations and calculate 
the average index. 
 
2.1.5. Determination of Palisade Ratio 
 
Palisade ratio is the average number of palisade cells under one epidermal cell . 
 
Place leaf fragments of about 5 × 5 mm in size in a test-tube containing about 5 ml of chloral hydrate 
solution and heat in a boiling water-bath for about 15 minutes or until the fragments become transparent. Transfer a 
fragment to a microscopical slide and prepare the mount of the upper e pidermis in chloral hydrate solution and put 
a small drop of glycerol solution on one side of the cover-glass to pr event the preparation from drying. Examine 
with a 40x objective and a 6x eye piece, to which a microscopical draw ing apparatus is attached. Trace four 
adjacent epidermal cells on paper; focus gently downward to bring the palisade into view and trace sufficient 
palisade cells to cover the area of the outlines of the four epider mal cells. Count the palisade cells under the four 
epidermal cells. Where a cell is intersected, include it in the  count only when more than half of it is within the area 
of the epidermal cells. Calculate the average number of palisade  cells beneath one epidermal cell, dividing the 
count by 4; this is the“Palisade ratio” (See Fig. 2). 
 
For each sample of leaf make not fewer than ten determinations and calculate 
the average number.  CCLXXVI   
                                             
  
 
 
 
                                                                             18.4 
                                       Fig. 2 Palisade ratio=  ———  = 4.5 
                                                                               4 
 
2.1.6. Determination of Vein-Islet Number 
 
The mesophyll of a leaf is divided into small portions of photosynthetic  tissue by anastomosis of the veins 
and veinlets; such small portions or areas are termed “Vein-Islets”. The numbe r of vein-islets per square millimeter 
is termed the “Vein-Islet number”. This value has been shown to be c onstant for any given species and, for full-
grown leaves, to be unaffected by the age of the plant or the size of the leaves. The vein-islet number has proved 
useful for the critical distinction of certain nearly related species. The det ermination is carried out as follows : 
 
For Whole or Cut leaves  –-Take pieces of leaf lamina with an area of not less than 4 s quare millimeters from the 
central portion of the lamina and excluding the midrib and the margin of the leaf. Clear the pieces of lamina by 
heating in a test tube containing chloral hydrate solution on a boiling w ater-bath for 30 to 60 minutes or until clear 
and prepare a mount in glycerol-solution or, if desired, stain with saf ranin solution and prepare the mount in 
Canada Balsam. Place the stage micrometer on the microscope st age and examine with 4x objective and a 6x eye 
piece. Draw a line representing 2 mm on a sheet of paper by means of a microscopical drawing apparatus and 
construct a square on the line representing an area of 4 square mill imeters. Move the paper so that the square is 
seen in the centre of the field of the eyepiece. Place the slide  with the cleared leaf piece on the microscope stage 
and draw in the veins and veinlets included within the square, completing  the outlines of those vein-islets which 
overlap two adjacent sides of the square. Count the number of vein-isl ets within the square including those 
overlapping on two adjacent sides and excluding those intersected by the other two sides . The result obtained is the 
number of vein-islets in 4 square millimeters. For each sample of  leaf make not fewer than three determinations 
and calculate the average number of vein-islets per square millimeter. 
 
For Leaf Fragments having an area less than 4 square millimeters  – Take fragments of leaf lamina each with 
an area of not less than 1 square millimeter, excluding the midrib a nd the margin of the leaf. Clear and prepare a 
mount as stated above. Use a 10x objective and a 6x eyepiece and draw a  line representing 1 mm on a sheet of 
paper by means of a microscopial drawing apparatus and construct a squa re on this line representing an area of 1 
square millimetre. Carry out the rest of the procedure as state d above. The result obtained is the number of vein-
islets in 1 square millimetre. For each sample of leaf make no less than 12 de terminations and calculate the average 
number. 
 
  CCLXXVII  2.1.7. Determination of Stomatal Number 
 
Place leaf fragments of about 5x5 mm in size in a test tube conta ining about 5 ml of chloral hydrate 
solution and heat in a boiling water-bath for about 15 minutes or until the fragments become transparent. Transfer a 
fragments to a microscopic slide and prepare the mount the lower epi dermis uppermost, in chloral hydrate solution 
and put a small drop of glycerol-ethanol solution on one side of the cover glass to prevent the preparation from 
drying. Examine with a 40 x objective and a 6x eye piece, to which a mi croscopical drawing apparatus is attached. 
Mark on the drawing paper a cross (x) for each stomata and calcula te the average number of stomata per square 
millimeter for each surface of the leaf. 
 
2.2. - DETERMINATION OF QUANTITATIVE DATA  
 
2.2.1. - Net Content  
 
            The content of the final or retail pack shall not be less than 98 percent of the declared net  content. 
 
2.2.2. - Foreign Matter  
 
            The sample shall be free from visible signs of mold growth, sliminess, stones, rodent  excreta, insects or any 
other noxious foreign matter when examined as given below. 
 
Take a representative portion from a large container, or remove the entire contents of the packing if 100 g 
or less, and spread in a thin layer in a suitable dish or tray. Exam ine in daylight with unaided eye.Transfer 
suspected particles, if any, to a petri dish, and examine with 10x lens in daylight. 
 
2.2.3. - Determination of Total Ash 
 
 Incinerate about 2 to 3 g accurately weighed, of the ground drug in a ta red platinum or silica dish at a 
temperature not exceeding 450 0 until free from carbon, cool and weigh. If a carbon free ash cannot be obtained in 
this way, exhaust the charred mass with hot water, collect the re sidue on an ashless filter paper, incinerate the 
residue and filter paper, add the filtrate, evaporate to dryness, and ignite at a temperature not exceeding 450 0. 
Calculate the percentage of ash with reference to the air-dried drug. 
 
2.2.4. - Determination of Acid Insoluble Ash 
 
 To the crucible containing total ash, add 25 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid . Collect the insoluble 
matter on an ashless filter paper (Whatman 41) and wash with hot wa ter until the filtrate is neutral. 
Transfer the filter paper containing the insoluble matter to the or iginal crucible, dry on a hot-plate and 
ignite to constant weight. Allow the residue to cool in a suitable de siccator for 30 minutes and weigh 
without delay. Calculate the content of acid-insoluble ash with reference to the air -dried drug.  
 
 
2.2.5. - Determination of Water Soluble Ash 
 
 Boil the ash for 5 minutes with 25 ml of water; collect insoluble m atter in a Gooch crucible or on an 
ashless filter paper, wash with hot water, and ignite for 15 minutes  at a temperature not exceeding 450 0. Subtract 
the weight of the insoluble matter from the weight of the ash; the  difference in weight represents the water-soluble 
ash. Calculate the percentage of water-soluble ash with reference to the air- dried drug. 
 
2.2.6. - Determination of Sulphated Ash  CCLXXVIII   
 Heat a silica or platinum crucible to redness for 10 minutes, allow  to cool in a desiccator and weigh. Put 1 
to 2 g of the substance, accurately weighed, into the crucible, ignite gently at firs t, until the substance is thoroughly 
charred. Cool, moisten the residue with 1 ml of sulphuric acid, heat gently until white fumes are no longer evolved 
and ignite at 800 0 ± 25 0 until all black particles have disappeared. Conduct the ignition in a  place protected from air 
currents. Allow the crucible to cool, add a few drops of sulphuric acid and heat. Ignite as before, allow to cool and 
weigh. Repeat the operation until two successive weighing do not differ by more than 0.5 mg.  
 
2.2.7. - Determination of Alcohol Soluble Extractive 
 
 Macerate 5 g of the air dried drug, coarsely powdered, with 100 ml of alcohol the specified strength in a 
closed flask for twenty-four hours, shaking frequently during six hours and allow to stand for  eighteen hours. Filter 
rapidly, taking precautions against loss of solvent, evaporate 25 ml of the filtra te to dryness in a tared flat bottomed 
shallow dish, and dry at 105 0, to constant weight and weigh. Calculate the percentage of alcohol-s oluble extractive 
with reference to the air-dried drug. 
 
2.2.8. - Determination of Water Soluble Extractive 
 
 Proceed as directed for the determination of alcohol-soluble extracti ve, using chloroform-water  instead of 
ethanol. 
 
2.2.9. - Determination of Ether Soluble Extractive (Fixed Oil Content) 
 
 Transfer a suitably weighed quantity (depending on the fixed oil content)  of the air-dried, crushed drug to 
an extraction thimble, extract with solvent ether (or petroleum  ether, b.p. 40 0 to 60 0) in a continuous extraction 
apparatus (Soxhlet extractor) for 6 hours. Filter the extract quantita tively into a tared evaporating dish and 
evaporate off the solvent on a water bath. Dry the residue at 105 0 to constant weight. Calculate the percentage of 
ether-soluble extractive with reference to the air-dried drug.  
 
2.2.10. - Determination of Moisture Content (Loss on Drying) 
 
 Procedure set forth here determines the amount of volatile matter (i.e., water dr ying off from the drug). For 
substances appearing to contain water as the only volatile constitue nt, the procedure given below, is appropriately 
used. 
 
 Place about 10 g of drug (without preliminary drying) after accura tely weighing (accurately weighed to 
within 0.01 g) it in a tared evaporating dish. For example, for unground or unpow derd drug, prepare about 10 g of 
the sample by cutting shredding so that the parts are about 3 mm in thickness. 
 
 Seeds and fruits, smaller than 3 mm should be cracked. Avoid the use of high speed mills in 
preparing the samples, and exercise care that no appreciable amount of moisture is lost during preparation 
and that the portion taken is representative of the official sample. After placing the above said amount of 
the drug in the tared evaporating dish, dry at 105 0 for 5 hours, and weigh. Continue the drying and 
weighing at one hour interval until difference between two successive  weighing corresponds to not more 
than 0.25 per cent. Constant weight is reached when two consecutive weighi ng after drying for 30 
minutes and cooling for 30 minutes in a desiccator, show not more than 0.01 g difference. 
 
2.2.11. - Determination of Water Insoluble Matter 
  CCLXXIX  Take 10 gm of sample, add 200 ml hot distilled H2O and bring to boiling. Allow to cool to room temperat ure. 
Filter through a tared gooch crucible having a bed of asbestos or sintered glass filt er Wash the residue with hot 
water till the filtrate is sugar-free (perform Molisch test). Dry the  gooch crucible or sintered glass filter at 135 20 C 
and weigh. Express as % insoluble matter. 
(Ref :- I.S.I Handbook of Food Analysis (Part II) – 1984 page10) 
 
2.2.12. - Determination of Volatile Oil in Drugs 
 
 The determination of volatile oil in a drug is made by distilling the drug with a mixture of  water and 
glycerin, collecting the distillate in a graduated tube in which the aqueous port ion of the distillate is automatically 
separated and returned to the distilling flask, and measuring the vol ume of the oil. The content of the volatile oil is 
expressed as a percentage v/w. 
 
 The apparatus consists of the following parts (see Fig.1). The cle venger’s apparatus described 
below is recommended but any similar apparatus may be used provided that  it permits complete 
distillation of the volatile oil. All glass parts of the apparatus  should be made of good quality resistance 
glass. 
 
 
Fig.1 Apparatus for volatile oil determination 
 
The apparatus is cleaned before each distillation by washing succes sively with acetone and  water,  then 
inverting it, filling it with chromic sulphuric acid mixture, after closing the open end at G, and allowing to stand, 
and finally rinsing with water.  CCLXXX   
 
Method of determination 
 
 A suitable quantity of the coarsely powdered drug together with 75 ml of glycerin  and 175 ml of water in 
the one litre distilling flask, and a few pieces of porous earthen ware and one filter paper 15 cm cut into small 
strips, 7 to 12 mm wide, are also put in the distilling flask, which is then connected to the still head. Before 
attaching the condenser, water is run into the graduated receiver, k eeping the tap T open until the water overflows, 
at P. Any air bubbles in the rubber tubing a—b are carefully removed by  pressing the tube. The tap is then closed 
and the condenser attached. The contents of the flask are now heated and stirred by frequent agitation until 
ebullition commences. The distillation is continued at a rate, which keeps the l ower end of the condenser cool. The 
flask is rotated occasionally to wash down any material that adheres to its side s. 
 
 At the end of the specified time (3 to 4 hours) heating is discontinue d, the apparatus is allowed to cool for 
10 minutes and the tap T is opened and the tube L 1 lowered slowly; as soon as the layer of the oil completely enter s 
into the graduated part of the receiver the tap is closed and the volume is read. 
 
 The tube L 1 is then raised till the level of water in it is above the l evel of B, when the tap T is slowly 
opened to return the oil to the bulb. The distillation is again continued for  another hour and the volume of oil is 
again read, after cooling the apparatus as before. If necessary, t he distillation is again continued until successive 
readings of the volatile oil do not differ. 
 
 The measured yield of volatile oil is taken to be the content of volatile oil in the drug. The dimensions of 
the apparatus may be suitably modified in case of necessity. 
 
2.2.13. - Special Processes Used in Alkaloidal Assays 
 
2.2.13.a - Continuous extraction of drug 
 
 Where continuous extraction of a drug of any other substance is recommende d in the monograph, the 
process consists of percolating it with suitable solvent at a t emperature approximately that of the boiling point of 
the solvent. Any apparatus that permits the uniform percolation of the drug and the continuous flow of the vapour 
of the solvent around the percolator may be used. The type commonly known a s the Soxhlet apparatus (see fig. 2) 
is suitable for this purpose. 
 
2.2.13.b - Tests for complete extraction of alkaloids 
 
 Complete extraction is indicated by the following tests: 
 
When extracting with an aqueous or alcoholic liquid - After extracting at least three times with the liquid, 
add to a few drops of the next portion, after acidifying with 2 N hydrochloric acid if necessary, 0.05 ml of 
potassium mercuri-iodide solution  or for solanaceous alkaloids 0.05 ml of potassium iodobismuthate solution; no 
precipitate or turbidity, is produced. 
 
When extracting with an immiscible solvent -  After extracting at least three times with the solvent, add t o 1 
to 2 ml of the next portion 1 to 2 ml of 0.1 N hydrochloric acid, remove the organic solvent by evaporation, 
transfer the aqueous residue to a test tube, and add 0.05 ml of potassium mercuri-iodide solution  for solanaceous 
alkaloids 0.05 ml of potassium iodobismuthate solution or for emetine, 0.05 ml of iodine solution; not more than a 
very faint opalescenece is produced.  CCLXXXI   
 
 
Fig. 2 - Apparatus for the continuous extraction of Drugs (Soxhlet apparatus) 
 
2.2.14. - Thin-Layer Chromatography (TLC) 
 
 Thin-layer chromatography is a technique in which a solute undergoes dis tribution between two phases, 
stationary phase acting through adsorption and a mobile phase in the form of a liquid. The adsorbent is a relatively 
thin, uniform layer of dry finely powdered material applied to a gla ss, plastic or metal sheet or plate. Precoated 
plates are most commonly used. Separation may also be achieved on the  basis of partition or a combination of 
partition and adsorption, depending on the particular type of support, its prepar ation and its use with different 
solvent.  
 
 Identification can be effected by observation of spots of identical R f value and about equal magnitude 
obtained, respectively, with an unknown and a reference sample chromatog raphed on the same plate. A visual 
comparison of the size and intensity of the spots usually serves for semi-quantitat ive estimation. 
  CCLXXXII   
 
Apparatus 
 
(a) Flat glass plates of appropriate dimensions which allow the applica tion at specified points of the 
necessary quantities of the solution being examined and appropriate refe rence solutions and which 
allow accommodation of the specified migration path-length. The plates  are prepared as described 
below; alternatively, commercially prepared plates may be used. 
 
(b) An aligning tray or a flat surface on which the plates can be al igned and rested when the coating 
substance is applied. 
 
(c) The adsorbent or coating substance consisting of finely divided adsorbent materials, normally 5 µm to 
40 µm in diameter is suitable for chromatography. It can be applied di rectly to the plate or can be 
bonded to the plate by means of plaster of paris (Hydrated Calcium S ulphate) or with any other 
suitable binders. The adsorbent may contain fluorescing material to he lp in visualising spots that 
absorb ultra-violet light. 
 
(d) A spreader which, when moved over the glass plate, will apply a unif orm layer of adsorbent of desired 
thickness over the entire surface of the plate. 
 
(e) A storage rack to support the plates during drying and transportation.  
 
(f) A developing chamber that can accommodate one or more plates and can be  properly closed and 
sealed. The chamber is fitted with a plate support rack that supports  the plates, back to back, with lid of 
the chamber in place. 
 
(g) Graduated micro-pipettes capable of delivering microlitre quantities say 10 µ l and less.  
 
(h) A reagent sprayer that will emit a fine spray and will not itself be attack ed by the reagent. 
 
(i) An ultra-violet light, suitable for observation at short (254 nm) and l ong (365 nm) ultra-violet 
wavelengths. 
 
Preparation of plates 
                  
                  Unless otherwise specified in the monograph, the plates are prepared in t he following manner. Prepare a 
suspension of the coating substance in accordance with the instructions of  the supplier and, using the spreading 
device designed for the purpose, spread a uniform layer of the suspension,  0.20 to 0.30 mm thick, on a flat glass 
plate 20 cm long. Allow the coated plates to dry in air, heat at 100 0 to 105 0 for at least 1 hour (except in the case of 
plates prepared with cellulose when heating for 10 minutes is normall y sufficient) and allow to cool, protected 
from moisture. Store the plates protected from moisture and use wit hin 3 days of preparation. At the time of use, 
dry the plates again, if necessary, as prescribed in the monographs. Now a days pre coated plates of silica gel on 
glass/aluminium/ plastic sheets are also available. 
 
Method 
 
 Unless unsaturated conditions are prescribed, prepare the tank by lining  the walls with sheets of filter 
paper; pour into the tank, saturating the filter paper in the process, sufficient of the mobile phase to form a layer of 
solvent 5 to 10 mm deep, close the tank and allow to stand for 1 hour at r oom temperature. Remove a narrow strip 
of the coating substance, about 5 mm wide, from the vertical sides of the plate . Apply the solutions being examined  CCLXXXIII  in the form of circular spots about 2 to 6 mm in diameter, or in the f orm of bands (10 to 20 mm x 2 to 6 mm unless 
otherwise specified) on a line parallel with, and 20 mm from, one end of  the plate, and not nearer than 20 mm to 
the sides; the spots should be 15 mm apart. If necessary, the solutions  may be applied in portions, drying between 
applications. Mark the sides of the plate 15 cm, or the distance spec ified in the monograph, from the starting line. 
Allow the solvent to evaporate and place the plate in the tank, ensur ing that it is as nearly vertical as possible and 
that the spots or bands are above the level of the mobile phase. Close  the tank and allow to stand at room 
temperature, until the mobile phase has ascended to the marked line. R emove the plate and dry and visualise as 
directed in the monograph; where a spraying technique is prescribed it  is essential that the reagent be evenly 
applied as a fine spray.  
 For two-dimensional chromatography dry the plate after the first development and carry out the second 
development in a direction perpendicular to the first. 
 
When the method prescribed in the monograph specifies ‘protected from li ght’ or ‘in subdued light’ it is intended 
that the entire procedure is carried out under these conditions. 
 
Visualisation 
 
The phrases ultra-violet light (254 nm) and ultra-violet light (365 nm)  indicate that the plate should be examined 
under an ultra-violet light having a maximum output at about 254 or at about 365 nm, as the case may be . 
 
The term secondary spot  means any spot other than the principal spot. Similarly, a secondary band is any band 
other than the principal band. 
 
Rf Value 
 
Measure and record the distance of each spot from the point of its applic ation and calculate the Rf value by dividing 
the distance travelled by the spots by the distance travelled by the front of the mobil e phase. 
 
2.2.15. - Starch Estimation (Mont Gomery, 1957) [Spectrophotometric method] 
  
Prepare 10 per cent homogenate of the plant tissue in 80 per cent ethanol . Centrifuge at 2000 rpm for 15 
minutes. To the residue thus obtained, add 4 ml of distilled water , heat on a water bath for 15 minutes and macerate 
with the help of glass rod. To each of the samples, add 3 ml of 52  per cent  perchloric acid  and centrifuge at 2000 
rpm for 15 minutes. The supernatant thus obtained is made upto known volume (generally upto 10 ml or depending 
on the expected concentration of starch). Take 0.1 ml aliquot, add 0.1 ml of 80 per cent phenol  and 5 ml conc. 
sulphuric acid, cool and then read the absorbance at 490 nm. 
 
2.2.16. - Sugar Estimation (Mont Gomery, 1957) [Spectrophotometric Method] 
 
            Prepare 10 per cent homogenate of the plant tissue in 80 per cent ethanol . Centrifuge at  2000 rpm for 15 
minutes. The supernatant obtained is made upto known volume (generally upto 10 ml or depending on the expected 
concentration of sugar). Take 0.1 ml aliquot, add 0.1 ml of 80 per cent phenol and 5 ml conc. sulphuric acid, cool 
and then read the absorbance at 490 nm. 
 
2.2.17. - Fatty Oil  Estimation 
 
 To estimate fatty oils, extract accurately weighed air-drie d powdered plant material with petroleum ether  
(40-60 0) in a Soxhlet apparatus. Dry the extract over anhydrous sodium sulphate  and remove the solvent under 
vacuum at 40 0. Weigh the residue and calculate the percentage with reference to the weight of pl ant material used. 
 
  CCLXXXIV  2.2.18. - Test for Argemone Oil (Mustard Oil) 
 
Take 2-3 drops of the oil in a dry test tube and mix successively with one drop of liquid phenol and 2-4 ml  
of conc. Sulphuric acid and shake. A deep red colour develops with in 10-20 seconds if argemone oil is pr esent as 
adulterant. 
 
2.2.19. - Test for the Presence of Cottonseed oil (Halphen Test) 
 
 Take about 5ml of  the oil in a test tube and add equal amount of Sulphur solution (1% solution of Sulphur 
in carbon disulphide and then add an equal volume of amyl alcohol). Mix thoroughly by s haking and heating gently 
in a water bath (70-80º) for a few minutes with occasional shaking until the carbon disulphide has boiled off and 
the sample stops foaming. Place the tube in an oil bath or a saturated brine bat h maintained at 110 to 115º, and hold 
for 1 to 2 hours. A red colour at the end of this period indicates the presence of cottonseed oil. This t est is sensitive 
to the extent of 0.5 percent of cottonseed oil in other oils.    
 
2.2.20.  - Test for Clove Oil -Alkali-Soluble Matter 
 Place 80 ml of a 5 per cent w/v solution of potassium hydroxide in a 150-ml fl ask with a long neck, which 
is graduated in tenths of an ml and is of such diameter that not less than 15cm in leng th has a capacity of 10ml. The 
flask before use is cleaned with Sulphuric acid and well rinsed wi th water. Add 10ml of the oil, cleared by filtration 
if necessary, and shake thoroughly at five-minute intervals for ha lf an hour, at ambient temperature. Raise the 
undissolved portion of the oil into the graduated part of the neck of the f lask by gradual addition of more of the 
potassium hydroxide solution; allow standing for not less than twenty-four hours, and read off the volume of the 
undissolved portion of the oil. The undissolved portion of the oil measures not less than 1.0 ml and not more than 
1.5 ml. 
 
2.2.21. - Test for  Eucalyptus Oil 
 
Determination of Cineole 
 
 Into a stout-walled test tube, about 15 mm in diameter and 80 mm in le ngth place 3 g, accurately weighed, 
of the oil preciously dried by shaking with anhydrous calcium chloride t ogether with 2.1 g, accurately weighed, of 
melted o-cresol. Insert a thermometer, graduated in fifths of a de gree, and stir the mixture well in order to induce 
crystallization; note the highest reading of the thermometer. War m three tube gently, until the contents are 
completely melted, insert the tube through a bored cork into a wide-mouthed bottle w hich is to act as an air jacked; 
allow to cool slowly, until crystallization commences, or until the temperature has fallen to the point previously 
noted. Stir the contents of the tube vigorously with the thermometer, r unning the latter on the side of the tube with 
an up and down motion in order to induce rapid crystallisatiojn’ continue the string and rubbing a long as the 
temperature rises. Take the highest point as the freezing point. 
 
 Remelt the mixture and repeat the determination of the freezing point until two consecutive concordant 
results are obtained, because the first temperature noted is always lower than t he true freezing point. 
 
 Find the percentage w/w of cineole corresponding to the freezing-point  from the table, obtaining 
intermediate value, by interpolation  (Table 2.1). 
 
                                                                  CCLXXXV                                                                             Table 2.1 
 
Freezing-Point Percent 
w/w of 
Cineole Freezing – point Percent 
w/w of 
Cineole 
24 0 . . . 45.6 30 0 . . . 53.4 
25 0 . . . 46.9 31 0 . . . 54.7 
26 0 . . . 48.2 32 0 . . . 56.0 
27 0 . . . 49.5 33 0 . . . 57.3 
28 0 . . . 50.8 34 0 . . . 58.6 
29 0 . . . 53.1 35 0 . . . 59.9 
36 0 . . . 61.2 47 0 . . . 80.0 
37 0 . . . 62.5 48 0 . . . 82.1 
38 0 . . . 63.8 49 0 . . . 84.2 
39 0 . . . 65.2 50 0 . . . 86.3 
40 0 . . . 66.8 51 0 . . . 88.8 
41 0 . . . 68.6 52 0 . . . 91.3 
42 0 . . . 70.5 53 0 . . . 93.8 
43 0 . . . 72.3 54 0 . . . 96.3 
44 0 . . . 74.2 55 0 . . . 99.3 
45 0 . . . 76.1 55.  20 . . . 100.0 
46 0 . . . 78.0  . . .  
 The o-cresol used must be pure and dry with a freezing-point n ot below 30 0. It is hygroscopic, and should 
be stored in a small welt-stoppered bottle because the pr esence of moisture may lower the results, even to 
the extent of 5 per cen t. 
 
2.2.22.- Determination of Acidity  
 
Reagents 
 
(1) Standard Sodium Hydroxide solution – 0.05 N 
(2) Phenolpthalein indicator – Dissolve 0.5 gm Phenolpthalein in 100 ml of 
50% ethyl alcohol (v/v) 
 
Procedure 
 
Take 10 gm of the sample in a suitable titration flask and dissolve in 75 ml of carbon dioxide  free water. Mix 
thoroughly. Titrate against standard sodium hydroxide solution using 4-6 drops of  phenolpthalein indicator till pink 
colour persists for 10 seconds. 
Determine blank on water and indicator and correct the volume of sodium 
hydroxide solution used. 
 
Calculation 
 
Acidity as formic acid (%) by weight = 0.23 X V  
M 
Where V = corrected volume of 0.05 N sod. Hydroxide used 
M = weight in gm of the sample taken for test 
(Ref :- I.S.I. Handbook of Food Analysis( Part II) 1984 page 37)  
  CCLXXXVI   
2.2.23. –Protein Estimation (Lowry et. al  1951) 
 
 Homogenise 100 mg plant metarial with 3 ml of 10% trichloroacetic acid . Centrifuge the homogenate at 
10,000 rpm. Discard the supernatant. Treat the pallets obtained after ce ntrifugation with 3 ml 1N sodium hydroxide , 
heat on water bath for 7 minutes and cool. Centrifuge the solution again for five to ten minute s at 5000 rpm. To 0.5 
ml of supernatant thus obtained after centrifugation, add 5 ml reagent containing 100 parts of 2% solution of 
sodium carbonate and one part of 2% solution of sodium potassium  tartrate. Allow it so stand for ten to fifteen 
minutes. Then add 5 ml Folin and Ciocalteu’s  Phenol reagent (diluted with distilled water in ratio of 1:1) and 
allow to stand for half-hour for development of colour and then finally measure the absorbance  at 700 nm.  
 
2.2.24. - Method for Alkaloid Estimation 
 
 Macerate the plant material with 2 per cent acetic acid in w ater, filter and concentrate the filtrate under 
reduced pressure at 45 0 to one third of the original volume. Adjust the pH to 2 by 4 M hydrochloric acid . The 
yellow precipitate will be separated from the solution (A). Diss olve in it 0.1 M to give solution (B). Add Mayer's 
reagent  to the solution A and B to give precipitate of alkaloid-Mayers reagent complex. Dissolve it again in 
acetone - methanol - water  (6 : 2 : 10) to give solution. Pass this complex finally through Amberlite IRA 400 anion 
exchange resin (500 g) to give an aqueous solution of alkaloid chlorides.  
 
2.2.25. -Determination of Esters –  Boil a convenient quantity of alcohol (90%) thoroughly to expel CO 2 and 
neutralize it to solution of phenolphthalein. Dissolve about 2 g of the oil or es ter, accurately weighed, in 5 ml of the 
neutralized alcohol contained in a hard glass flask, and neutralize t he free acid in the solution with N/10 alcoholic 
KOH, using 0.2 ml of solution of phenolphthalein as indicator. Add 20 ml of N/2 a lcoholic KOH, attach the flask 
to a reflux condenser, boil on a water bath for 1 hour, and immediately ti trate the excess of alkali with N/2 H 2SO 4, 
using a further 0.5 ml of solution of phenolphthalein as indicator. Repeat the operation without the oi l or ester. The 
difference between the titrations is equivalent to the alkali required to saponif y the esters.  
 
 Each ml of N/2 alcoholic KOH is equivalent to- 
 
0.0981 g  of  Bornyl Acetate 
0.0364 g  of  Grlyceryl Triacetate  
0.0981 g  of  Linalyl Acetate  
0.0991 g  of  Menthyl Acetate  
0.0761 g  of  Menthyl Salicylate  
 
 
 
2.3. - LIMIT TESTS  
 
Table 2.2 - Permissible Limits of Heavy Metals 
 
S.No.     Heavy Metal contents                                 Permissible limits 
1.            Lead                                                              10 ppm 
2             Arsenic                                                           3 ppm 
3.            Cadmium                                                     0.3 ppm 
4.            Mercury                                                          1 ppm  
 
2.3.1. - Limit Test for Arsenic 
 
In the limit test for arsenic, the amount of arsenic is expressed as arsenic, As  ppm   CCLXXXVII   
Apparatus  
 
 A wide-mouthed bottle capable of holding about 120 ml is fitted with a rubbe r bung through which passes 
a glass tube. The latter, made from ordinary glass tubing, has a t otal length of 200 mm and an internal diameter of 
exactly 6.5 mm (external diameter about 8 mm). It is drawn out at one  end to a diameter of about 1 mm and a hole 
not less than 2 mm in diameter is blown in the side of the tube, near the constricte d part. When the bung is inserted 
in the bottle containing 70 ml of liquid, the constricted end of the tube is  above the surface of the liquid, and the 
hole in the side is below the bottom of the bung. The upper end of the tube is  cut off square, and is either slightly 
rounded or ground smooth. 
 
 Two rubber bungs (about 25 mm x 25 mm), each with a hole bored centrally a nd true, exactly 6.5 mm in 
diameter, are fitted with a rubber band or spring clip for holding them  tightly together. Alternatively the two bungs 
may be replaced by any suitable contrivance satisfying the conditions described under  the General Test. 
 
Reagents 
 
Ammonium oxalate AsT: Ammonium oxalate  which complies with the following additional test: 
 
 Heat 5 g with 15 ml of water,  5 ml of nitric acid AsT, and 10 ml of sulphuric acid AsT in narrow necked, 
round-bottomed flask until frothing ceases, cool, and apply the General Test; no visible s tain is produced. 
 
Arsenic solution, dilute, AsT: 
  
Strong Arsenic solution AsT  1 ml 
Water sufficient to produce                      100 ml 
Dilute arsenic solution, AsT must be freshly prepared. 
1 ml contains 0.01 mg of arsenic, as. 
 
Arsenic solution, strong, AsT: 
 
 Arsenic trioxide             0.132 g 
 Hydrochloric acid                 50 ml 
Water sufficient to produce              100 ml 
  
Brominated hydrochloric acid AsT: 
 
 Bromine solution AsT            1 ml 
 Hydrochloric acid AsT             100 ml 
 
Bromine solution AsT: 
 
 Bromine                                                                                        30 g 
 Potassium bromide                    30 g 
 Water sufficient to produce                            100 ml 
 
It complies with the following test: 
 
 Evaporate 10 ml on a water-bath nearly to dryness, add 50 ml of purified water, 10 ml of hydrochloric acid 
AsT  and sufficient stannous chloride solution AsT to reduce the remaining bromine and apply the General Test; the  CCLXXXVIII  stain produced is not deeper than 1 ml standard stain, showing that the proportion of arsenic present does not 
exceed 1 part per million. 
 
Citric acid AsT: Citric acid which complies with the following additional tests: Dissolve 10 g i n 50 ml of water 
add 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid AsT  and apply the General Test; no visible stain is produced.  
 
Hydrochloric acid AsT:  Hydrochloric acid diluted with water  to contain about 32 per cent w/w of hydrochloride 
acid and complying with the following additional tests: 
 
(i) Dilute 10 ml with sufficient water to produce 50 ml, add 5 ml of ammonium thiocyanate solution 
and stir immediately; no colour is produced. 
(ii) To 50 ml add 0.2 ml of bromine solution AsT, evaporate on a water-bath until reduced to 16 ml 
adding more bromine solution AsT, if necessary, in order that an excess, as indicated by the colour, 
may be present throughout the evaporation; add 50 ml of water and 5 drops of stannous chloride 
solution AsT, and apply the General Test; the stain produced is not deeper than a 0.2 m l standard 
stain prepared with the same acid, showing that the proportion of arsenic pres ent does not exceed 
0.05 part per million. 
Hydrochloric acid (constant-boiling composition) AsT :  Boil hydrochloric acid AsT to constant boiling 
Composition  in the presence of  hydrazine hydrate , using 1 ml of 10 per cent w/v solution in 
water  per litre of the acid. 
 
*Mercuric Chloride Paper: Smooth white filter paper, not less than 25 mm in width, soaked in a sa turated 
solution of mercuric chloride, pressed to remove superfluous solution, and dried at about 60 0, in the dark. The 
grade of the filter paper is such that the weight is between 65 a nd 120 g per sq. mm; the thickness in mm of 400 
papers is approximately equal numerically, to the weight in g per sq. mm.  
 
Nitric acid AsT:  Nitric acid which complies with the following additional test: 
 
 Heat 20 ml in a porcelain dish with 2 ml of sulphuric acid AsT,  until white fumes are given off. Cool, add 2 
ml of water, and again heat until white fumes are given off; cool , add 50 ml of water and 10 ml of stannated 
hydrochloric acid AsT, and apply the General Test; no visible stain is produced. 
--------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
*N OTE –Murcuric chloride paper should be stored in a stoppered bottle in the dark. Paper which has been expose d 
to sunlight or to the vapour of ammonia affords a lighter stain or no stain at all when employed in the  limit test for 
arsenic. 
Potassium chlorate AsT:  Potassium chlorate which complies with the following additional test: 
 
Mix 5 g in the cold with 20 ml of water and 22 ml of hydrochloric acid AsT; when the first reaction has 
subsided, heat gently to expel chlorine, remove the last traces wit h a few drops of stannous chloride solution AsT,  
add 20 ml of water, and apply the General Test; no visible stain is produced. 
 
Potassium iodide AsT:  Potassium iodide which complies with the following additional test: 
Dissolve 10 g in 25 ml of hydrochloric acid AsT and 35 ml of water,  add 2 drops of stannous chloride 
solution AsT  and apply the General Test; no visible stain is produced. 
 
Sodium carbonate, anhydrous AsT:  Anhydrous sodium carbonate which complies with the following additional 
test: 
 
Dissolve 5 g in 50 ml of water, add 20 ml of brominated hydrochloric acid AsT,  remove the excess of bromine 
with a few drops of stannous chloride solution AsT, and apply the General Test; no visible stain is produced. 
  CCLXXXIX  Sodium Salicylate: Of the Indian Pharmacopoeia.   
 
Stannated hydrochloric acid AsT: 
 
Stannous chloride solution AsT        1 ml 
Hydrochloric Acid AsT                100 ml 
 
Stannous Chloride solution AsT:  Prepared from stannous  chloride solution by adding an equal volume of 
hydrochloric acid , boiling down to the original volume, and filtering through a fine-grain filter paper.  
 
It complies with the following test: 
  
To 10 ml add 6 ml of water and 10 ml of hydrochloric acid AsT,  distil and collect 16 ml. To the distillate 
and 50 ml of water  and 2 drops of stannuous chloride solution AsT and apply the General Test; the stain produced 
is not deeper than a 1-ml standard stain,  showing that the proportion of arsenic present does not exceed 1 part per 
million. 
 
Sulphuric acid AsT:  Sulphuric acid which complies with the following additional test: 
 
 Dilute 10 g with 50 ml of water, add 0.2 ml of stannous chloride solution AsT, and apply the General Test; 
no visible stain is produced. 
 
Zinc AsT:  Granulated Zinc which complies with following additional test: 
 
 Add 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid AsT  to 50 ml of water,  and apply the General Test, using 10 of 
the zinc and allowing the action to continue for one hour; no visible stai n is produced (limit of arsenic). Repeat the 
test with the addition of 0.1 ml of dilute arsenic solution AsT;  a faint but distinct yellow stain is produced (test for 
sensitivity). 
 
General Method of Testing - By a variable method of procedure suitable to the p articular needs of 
each substance, a solution is prepared from the sub stance being examined which may or may 
not contain that substance, but contains the whole of the arsenic (if any) originally present in 
that substance. This solution, referred to as the ` test solution’, is used in the actual test. 
 
General Test - The glass tube is lightly packed with cotton wool, previously moiste ned with lead acetate solution 
and dried, so that the upper surface of the cotton wool is not less than 25 mm below the top of the tube. The upper 
end of the tube is then inserted into the narrow end of one of the pair of r ubber bungs, either to a depth of about 10 
mm when the tube has a rounded-off end, or so that the ground end of the tube i s flush with the larger end of the 
bung. A piece of mercuric chloride paper is placed flat on the top of the bung and the other bung placed over it and 
secured by means of the rubber band or spring clip in such a manner that the borings of the two bungs (or the upper 
bung and the glass tube) meet to form a true tube 6.5 mm in diameter  interrupted by a diaphragm of mercuric 
chloride paper. 
 
 Instead of this method of attaching the mercuric chloride paper, any other method may be used provided 
(1) that the whole of the evolved gas passes through the paper; (2) t hat the portion of the paper in contact with the 
gas is a circle 6.5 mm in diameter; and (3) that the paper is pr otected from sunlight during the test. The test solution 
prepared as specified, is placed in the wide-mouthed bottle, 1 g of potassium iodide AsT and 10 g of zinc AsT  
added, and the prepared glass tube is placed quickly in position. The acti on is allowed to proceed for 40 minutes. 
The yellow stain which is produced on the mercuric chloride paper if arsenic is present is compared by day light 
with the standard stains produced by operating in a similar manner with known quantities of dilute arsenic solution  CCXC  AsT . The comparison of the stains is made immediately at the completi on of the test. The  standard stains  used for 
comparison are freshly prepared; they fade on keeping. 
 
 By matching the depth of colour with standard stains , the proportion of arsenic in the substance may be 
determined. A stain equivalent to the 1-ml standard stain, produced by operating  on 10 g of substance indicates that 
the proportion of arsenic is 1 part per million. 
 
NOTE : (1) The action may be accelerated by placing the apparatus on a w arm surface, care being taken that the 
mercuric chloride paper remains dry throughout the test. 
 
(2) The most suitable temperature for carrying out the test is generally about 40 0 but because the rate of 
the evolution of the gas varies somewhat with different batches z inc AsT, the temperature may be 
adjusted to obtain a regular, but not violent, evolution of gas. 
 
(3) The tube must be washed with hydrochloric acid AsT , rinsed with water and dried between successive 
tests. 
 
Standard Stains - Solutions are prepared by adding to 50 ml of water, 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid AsT  
and quantities of dilute arsenic solutions AsT varying from 0.2 ml to 1 ml. The resulting solutions, when treated as 
described in the General Test, yield stains on the mercuric chloride paper referred to as the standard stains. 
 
Preparation of the Test Solution 
 
 In the various methods of preparing the test solution given below, the quantities are so arranged unless 
otherwise stated, that when the stain produced from the solution to be exa mined is not deeper than the 1-ml 
standard stain , the proportion of arsenic present does not exceed the permitted limit. 
 
Ammonium chloride - Dissolve 2.5 g in 50 ml of water, and 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid AsT.  
 
Boric acid - Dissolve 10 g with 2 g of citric acid AsT   in 50 ml water, and add 12 ml of stannated hydrochloric 
acid AsT. 
 
Ferrous sulphate - Dissolve 5 g in 10 ml of water and 15 ml of stannated hydrochloric  acid AsT and disitil 20 ml; 
to the distillate add a few drops of bromine solution AsT. Add 2 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid AsT,  heat under 
a reflux condenser for one hour, cool, and add 10 ml of water and 10 ml of hydrochloric acid AsT. 
 
Glycerin - Dissolve 5 g in 50 ml of water, and add 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid AsT. 
 
Hydrochloric acid -  Mix 10 g with 40 ml of water and 1 ml of stannous chloride solution AsT. 
 
Magnesium sulphate - Dissolve 5 g in 50 ml of water and add 10 ml of stannated  hydrochloric acid AsT. 
 
Phosphoric acid - Dissolve 5 g in 50 ml of water  and add 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid AsT   
Potassium iodide - Dissolve 5 g in 50 ml of water  and add 2 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid AsT. 
 
Sodium bicarbonate -  Dissolve 5 g in 50 ml of water and add 15 ml of brominated hydrochloric acid AsT, and 
remove the excess of bromine with a few drops of stannous chloride solution AsT. 
 
Sodium hydroxide - Dissolve 2.5 g in 50 ml of water, add 16 ml of brominated hydrochloric acid AsT, and 
remove the excess of bromine with a few drops of stannous chloride solution AsT. 
  CCXCI  2.3.2. - Limit Test for Chlorides  
 
 Dissolve the specified quantity of the substance in water or  prepare a solution as directed in the text and 
transfer to a Nessler cylinder. Add 10 ml of dilute nitric acid,  except when nitric acid is used in the preparation of 
the solution, dilute to 50 ml with water, and add 1 ml of silver nitrate solution.  Stir immediately with a glass rod 
and allow to stand for 5 minutes. The opalescence produced is not greater  than the standard opalescence, when 
viewed transversely. 
 
Standard Opalescence 
 
 Place 1.0 ml of a 0.05845 per cent w/v solution of sodium chloride and 10 ml of dilute nitric acid  in a 
Nessler cylinder . Dilute to 50 ml with water and add 1 ml of silver nitrate solution . Stir immediately with a glass 
rod and allow to stand for five minutes. 
 
2.3.3. - Limit Test for Heavy Metals 
 
 The test for heavy metals is designed to determine the content of  metallic impurities that are coloured by 
sulphide ion, under specified conditions. The limit for heavy metals is indicated in the individual monographs in 
terms of the parts of lead per million parts of the substance (by weight), as determined by visual comparison of the 
colour produced by the substance with that of a control prepared from a standard lead solution. 
 
 Determine the amount of heavy metals by one of the following methods  and as directed in the individual 
monographs. Method A is used for substances that yield clear colourless  solutions under the specified test 
conditions. Method B is used for substances that do not yield clear, colourl ess solutions under the test conditions 
specified for method A, or for substances which, by virtue of their com plex nature, interfere with the precipitation 
of metals by sulphide ion. Method C is used for substances that yield c lear, colourless solutions with sodium 
hydroxide solution. 
 
Special Reagents 
 
Acetic acid Sp.:  Acetic acid  which complies with the following additional test : Make 25 ml al kaline with dilute 
ammonia solution Sp.,  add 1 ml of potassium cyanide solution Sp.,  dilute to 50 ml with water and add two drops of 
sodium sulphide solution; no darkening is produced. 
 
Dilute acetic acid Sp.:  Dilute acetic acid, which complies with the following additional test – Evaporate 20 ml i n a 
porcelain dish, nearly to dryness on a water-bath. Add to the residue 2 m l of the acid and dilute with water to 25 
ml, add 10 ml of hydrogen sulphide solution.  Any dark colour produced is not more than that of a control solution 
consisting of 2 ml of the acid and 4.0 ml of standard lead solution diluted to 25 ml with water. 
 
Ammonia solution Sp.:  Strong ammonia solution which complies with the following additional test: Evaporate 10 
ml to dryness on a water-bath; to the residue add 1 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid Sp. a nd evaporate to dryness. 
Dissolve the residue in 2 ml of dilute acetic acid Sp. Add sufficient water to produce 25 m l. 
 
 Add 10 ml of hydrogen sulphide solution.  Any darkening produced is not greater than in a blank solution 
containing 2 ml of dilute acetic acid Sp. 1.0 ml of standard lead solution and sufficient water to produce 25 ml. 
 
Dilute ammonia solution Sp.:  Dilute ammonia solution which complies with the following additional test: To 20 
ml add 1 ml of potassium cyanide solution Sp.,  dilute to 50 ml with water, and add two drops of sodium sulphide 
solution;  no darkening is produced. 
  CCXCII  Hydrochloric acid:  Hydrochloric acid  which complies with the following additional test: Evaporate off t he acid in 
a beaker to dryness on a water-bath. Dissolve the residue in 2 ml of dilute acid Sp., dilute to 17 ml with water and 
add 10 ml of hydrogen sulphide solution;  any darkening produced is not greater than in a blank solution containing 
2.0 ml of standard lead solution,  2 ml of dilute acetic acid Sp.  and dilute to 40 ml with water. 
 
Dilute hydrochloric acid Sp.: Dilute hydrochloric acid, which complies with the following additional test: Treat 
10 ml of the acid in the manner described under Hydrochloric acid Sp. 
 
Lead nitrate stock solution: Dissolve 0.1598 g of lead nitrate  in 100 ml of water  to which has been added 1 ml of 
nitric acid,  then dilute with water  to 1000 ml. This solution must be prepared and stored in polyethylene or gla ss 
containers free from soluble lead salts. 
 
Standard lead solution: On the day of use, dilute 10.0 ml of lead nitrate stock solution with water to 100.0 ml. 
Each ml of standard lead solution contains the equivalent of 10 µg of lead. A control comparison solution prepa red 
with 2.0 ml of standard lead solution contains, when compared to a solution re presenting 1.0 g of the substance 
being tested, the equivalent of 20 parts per million of lead. 
 
Nitric acid Sp.: Nitric acid  which complies with the following additional test: Dilute 10 ml wi th 10 ml of water, 
make alkaline with  ammonia solution Sp., add 1 ml of potassium cyanide solution Sp., dilute to 50 ml with water, 
and add two drops of sodium sulphide solution; no darkening is produced. 
 
Potassium cyanide solution Sp.: See Appendix 2.3.5.  
 
Sulphuric acid Sp.:  Sulphuric acid which complies with following additional test: Add 5 g to 20 ml of water  make 
alkaline with ammonia solution Sp.,  add 1 ml of potassium cyanide solution Sp. , dilute to 50 ml with water  and add 
two drops of sodium sulphide solution;  no darkening is produced.  
 
Method A  
 
Standard solution -  Into a 50 ml Nessler cylinder, pipette 2 ml of standard lead solution and dilute with water  to 
25 ml. Adjust with dilute acetic acid Sp.  or dilute ammonia solution Sp to a pH between 3.0 and 4.0, dilute with 
water  to about 35 ml, and mix. 
 
Test solution -  In to a 50 ml Nessler cylinder, place 25 ml of the solution prepared for the test as directed in the 
individual monograph, or using the stated volume of acid when specified in t he individual monograph, dissolve and 
dilute with water  to 25 ml the specified quantity of the substance being tested. Adjust with dilute acetic acid Sp.  or 
dilute ammonia solution Sp.  to a pH between 3.0 and 4.0, dilute with water  to about 35 ml and mix. 
 
Procedure -  To each of the cylinders containing the standard solution and test  solution, respectively, add 10 ml of 
freshly prepared hydrogen sulphide solution, mix, dilute with water  to 50 ml, allow to stand for five minutes, and 
view downwards over a white surface; the colour produced in the test solution  is not darker than that produced in 
the standard solution. 
 
Method B 
 
Standard solution -  Proceed as directed under Method A. 
 
Test solution - Weigh in a suitable crucible the quantity of the substance specifie d in individual monograph, add 
sufficient sulphuric acid Sp. to wet the sample, and ignite carefully at a low temperature unt il thoroughly charred. 
Add to the charred mass 2 ml of nitric acid Sp.  and five drops of sulphuric acid Sp.  and heat cautiously until white  CCXCIII  fumes are no longer evolved. Ignite, preferably in a muffle furnace , at 500 0 to 600 0 until the carbon is completely 
burnt off. Cool, add 4 ml of hydrochloric acid Sp., cover, digest on a water bath for 15 minutes, uncover and 
slowly evaporate to dryness on a water-bath. Moisten the residue wit h one drop of hydrochloric acid Sp.,  add 10 ml 
of hot water and digest for two minutes. Add ammonia solution sp ., dropwise, until the solution is just alkaline to 
litmus paper,  dilute with water to 25 ml and adjust with dilute acetic acid Sp. to a pH between 3.0 and 4.0. Filter if 
necessary, rinse the crucible and the filter with 10 ml of water , combine the filtrate and washings in a 50 ml Nessler 
cylinder, dilute with water, to about 35 ml, and mix. Procedure: Proceed as directed under Method A. 
 
Method C  
 
Standard solution - Into a 50 ml Nessler cylinder, pipette 2 ml of standard lead solution,  add 5 ml of dilute 
sodium hydroxide solution.,  dilute with water  to 50 ml and mix. 
 
Test solution -  Into a 50 ml Nessler cylinder,  place 25 ml of the solution prepared for the test as directed in the  
individual monograph; or, if not specified otherwise in the individual monograph, dissolve  the specified quantity in 
a mixture of 20 ml of water and 5 ml of dilute sodium hydroxide solution.  Dilute 50 ml with water and mix. 
 
Procedure - To each of the cylinders containing the standard solution and the test solution,  respectively add 5 
drops of sodium sulphide solution, mix, allow to stand for five minutes and view downwards over a white  surface; 
the colour produced in the test solution  is not darker than that produced in the standard solution. 
 
 
2.3.4. - Limit Test for Iron 
 
Standard Iron solution -  Weigh accurately 0.1726 g of ferric ammonium sulphate and dissolve in 10 ml of 0.1 N 
sulphuric acid and sufficient water  to produce 1000.0 ml. Each ml of this solution contains 0.02 mg of Fe. 
 
Method 
 
 Dissolve the specified quantity of the substance being examined in 40 m l of water, or use 10 ml of the 
solution prescribed in the monograph, and transfer to a Nessler cylinder.  Add 2 ml of a 20 per cent w/v solution of 
iron-free citric acid and 0.1 ml of thioglycollic acid, mix, make alkaline with iron-free ammonia solution, dilute to 
50 ml with water  and allow to stand for five minutes. Any colour produced is not more inte nse than the standard 
colour. 
 
Standard colour -  Dilute 2.0 ml of standard iron solution with 40 ml of water in a Nessler cylinder. Add 2 ml of a 
20 per cent w/v solution of iron-free citric acid and 0.1 ml of thioglycollic acid, mix, make alkaline with iron-free 
ammonia solution, dilute to 50 ml with water and allow to stand for five minutes. 
 
2.3.5. - Limit Test for Lead  
 
 The following method is based on the extraction of lead by solutions of dithizone . All reagents used for the 
test should have as low a content of lead as practicable. All rea gent solutions should be stored in containers of 
borosilicate glass. Glassware should be rinsed thoroughly with warm dilute nitric acid, followed by water. 
 
Special Reagents 
 
(1) Ammonia-cyanide solution Sp.:  Dissolve 2 g of potassium cyanide in 15 ml of strong ammonia solution and 
dilute with water  to 100 ml. 
  CCXCIV  (2) Ammonium citrate solution Sp.:  Dissolve 40 g of citric acid in 90 ml water. Add two drops of phenol  red 
solution then add slowly strong ammonia solution until the solution acquires a reddish colour. Remove any 
lead present by extracting the solution with 20 ml quantities of dithizone  extraction solution  until the dithizone  
solution retains its orange-green colour. 
 
(3) Dilute standard lead solution: Dilute 10.0 ml of standard lead solution with sufficient 1 per cent v/v solution 
of nitric acid to produce 100 ml. Each ml of this solution contains 1 µg of lead per ml. 
 
(4) Dithizone extraction solution: Dissolve 30 mg of diphenylthiocarbazone in 1000 ml of chloroform and add 5 
ml of alcohol.  Store the solution in a refrigerator. Before use, shake a suitabl e volume of the solution with 
about half its volume of 1 per cent v/v solution of nitric acid  and discard the acid. 
 
 
(5) Hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution Sp.: Dissolve 20 g of hydroxylamine hydrochloride in sufficient 
water to produce about 65 ml. Transfer to separator, add five drops of thymol blue solution , add strong 
ammonia solution until the solution becomes yellow. Add 10 ml of a 4 per cent w/v solution of sodium 
diethyldithiocarbamate and allow to stand for five minutes. Extract with successive quanti ties, each of 10 ml, 
of chloroform until a 5 ml portion of the extract does not assume a yellow colour whe n shaken with dilute 
copper sulphate solution. Add dilute hydrochloric acid  until the solution is pink and then dilute with sufficient 
water to produce 100 ml. 
 
(6) Potassium cyanide solution Sp.:  Dissolve 50 g of potassium cyanide  in sufficient water  to produce 100 ml. 
Remove the lead from this solution by extraction with successive qua ntities, each of 20 ml of dithizone 
extraction solution until the dithizone solution retains its orange-green colour. Extract any dit hizone remaining 
in the cyanide solution by shaking with chloroform. Dilute this cyanide solution with sufficient water  to 
produce a solution containing 10 g of potassium cyanide in each 100 ml. 
 
(7) Standard dithizone solution: Dissolve 10 ml of diphenylthiocarbazone in 1000 ml of chloroform. Store the 
solution in a glass-stoppered, lead-free bottle, protected from light and in a refrig erator. 
 
(8) Citrate-cyanide wash solution:  To 50 ml of water add 50 ml of ammonium citrate solution Sp.  and 4 ml of 
potassium cyanide solution Sp.,  mix, and adjust the pH, if necessary, with strong ammonia solution to 9.0. 
 
(9)  Buffer solution pH 2.5: To 25.0 ml of 0.2 M potassium hydrogen phthalate add 37.0 ml of 0.1 N 
hydrochloric acid, and dilute with sufficient water  to produce 100.0 ml. 
 
(10) Dithizone-carbon tetrachloride solution: Dissolve 10 mg of diphenylthiocarbazone in 1000 ml of carbon 
tetrachloride. Prepare this solution fresh for each determination.  
 
(11)  pH 2.5 wash solution: To 500 ml of a 1 per cent v/v nitric acid add strong ammonia solution     until the pH 
of the mixture is 2.5, then add 10 ml of buffer solution pH 2.5 and mix.  
 
(12) Ammonia-cyanide wash solution: To 35 ml of pH 2.5 wash solution add 4 ml of ammonia-                   
cyanide solution Sp., and mix.  
 
Method  
 
 Transfer the volume of the prepared sample directed in the monograph to a separator and unless otherwise 
directed in monograph, add 6 ml of ammonium citrate solution Sp., and 2 ml hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution 
Sp., (For the determination of lead in iron salts use 10 ml of ammonium citrate solution Sp.).  Add two drops of  CCXCV phenol red solution and make the solution just alkaline (red in colour) by the addition of strong ammonnia solution. 
Cool the solution if necessary, and add 2 ml of potassium cyanide solution Sp . Immediately extract the solution 
with several quantities each of 5 ml, of dithizone extraction solution, draining off each extract into another 
separating funnel, until the dithizone extraction solution retains its g reen colour. Shake the combine dithizone 
solutions for 30 seconds with 30 ml of a 1 per cent w/v solution of nitric acid and discard the chloroform layer. 
Add to the solution exactly 5 ml of standard dithizone solution and 4 ml of ammonia-cyanide solution Sp . and 
shake for 30 seconds; the colour of the chloroform layer is of no deeper  shade of violet than that of a control made 
with a volume of dilute standard lead solution  equivalent to the amount of lead permitted in the sample under 
examination. 
 
 
2.3.6. - Limit Test for Sulphates  
 
Reagents  
 
Barium sulphate reagent:  Mix 15 ml of 0.5 M barium chloride, 55 ml of water, and 20 ml of sulphate free 
alcohol, add 5 ml of a 0.0181 per cent w/v solution of potassium sulphate, dilute to 100 m l with water, and mix. 
Barium sulphate reagent must be freshly prepared.  
 
0.5 M Barium chloride: Barium chloride dissolved in water  to contain in 1000 ml 122.1 g of BaCl 2,  2H 2O. 
 
Method 
 
 Dissolve the specified quantity of the substance in water,  or prepare a solution as directed in the text, 
transfer to a Nessler cylinder,  and add 2 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid, except where hydrochloric acid is used in 
the preparation of the solution. Dilute to 45 ml with water , add 5 ml of barium sulphate reagent. Stir immediately 
with a glass rod, and allow to stand for five minutes. The turbidity produced is not greater than the standard 
turbidity , when viewed transversely. Standard turbidity: Place 1.0 ml of 0.1089 per  cent w/v solution of potassium 
sulphate and 2 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid  in a Nessler cylinder ,dilute to 45 ml with water , add 5 ml of barium 
sulphate reagent, stir immediately with a glass rod and allow to stand for five m inutes. 
 
2.3.7. - Heavy Metals by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry 
 
Atomic absorption spectrophotometry is used in the determination of heav y metal elements and some 
nonmetal elements in the atomic state. 
 
The light of characteristic wave length emitted from a cathodi c discharge lamp is absorbed when it passes 
through the atomic vapor generated from sample containing the element  being examined atomized to the ground 
state. The assay of the element being examined is tested by dete rmining the decreased degree of light intensity of 
radiation. Atomic absorption obeys the general rule for absorption spectr ophotometry. The assay is carried out by 
comparing the abosorbance of the test preparation with that of the reference preparat ion.  
 
Apparatus 
 
An atomic absorption spectrophotometer consists of a light source, an at omic generator, a monochromator 
and a detector system. Some are equipped with a background compensation s ystem and automatic sampling 
system, etc. 
 
 
  CCXCVI  1. Light Source: A hollow-cathode discharge lamp is usually used. The cathode is made of  the element being 
examined. 
 
2. Atomic Generator: There are four main types : flame atomizer, graphite furnace a tomizer, hydride-generated 
atomizer, cold vapor atomizer. 
 
(1) Flame atomizer:  It mainly consists of a nebulizer and a burner. Its function is to ne bulize the test solution into 
aerosol, which is mixed with combustion gas. And the mixture is introduced into the flame generated by the burner. 
So that the substance being examined is to be dried, evaporated to form t he ground state atoms of the element being 
examined. The burning flame is generated by different mixtures of ga ses, acetylene-air is mostly used. By 
modifying the proportion of combustion gas, the temperature of the flame can be controlled and a better stability 
and a better sensitivity can be obtained. 
 
(2) Furnace atomizer: It consists of electric furnace and a power supply. Its function is to dry and incinerate the 
substance being examined. During the stage of high temperature atomization, the g round state atoms of the element 
being examined are to be formed. Graphite is commonly used as the heat er. Protection gas is introduced into the 
furnace to avoid oxidation and used to transfer the sample vapor. 
 
(3) Hydride-generated atomizer:  It consists of hydride generator and atomic absorption cell. It is used for the 
determination of the elements such as arsenic, selenium and antimony etc. Its function is to reduce the element to 
be examined in acidic medium to the low-boiling and easily pyrolyzed hy dride. The hydride is then swept by a 
stream of carrier gas into the atomic absorption cell which consi sts of quartz tube and heater etc., in which the 
hydride is pyrolyzed by heating to form the ground-state atom. 
 
(4) Cold vapor atomizer:  It consists of a mercury vapor atomizer and an absorption cell. It  is suitable for the 
determination of mercury. Its function is to reduce the mercuric ion into mercury vapor which is swept into the 
quartz absorption cell by carrier gas. 
 
3. Monochromator: Its function is to separate the specified wavelength radiation fr om the electromagnetic 
radiations erradiated from the light source. The optical path of the apparatus should assure the good spectra 
resolution and has the ability to work well at the condition of narrow spectral band (0.2 nm). The commonly used 
wavelength region is 190.0 - 900.0 nm. 
 
4. Detector system: It consists of a detector, a signal processor and a recording syst em. It should have relatively 
higher sensitivity and better stability and can follow the rapid change of the signa l absorption. 
 
5. Background compensation system: System employed for the correction of atmospheric effects on the 
measuring system. Four principles can be utilized for background compens ation: continuous spectrum sources (a 
deuterium lamp is often used in the UV region), the Zeeman effect, the self inversion phenomenon and the non 
resonance spectrum. In the analysis using atomic absorption spectrophotome try, the interference to the 
determination caused by background and other reasons should be noticed. Changes of some experimental 
conditions, such as the wavelength, the slit width, the atomizing conditi on, etc., may affect the sensitivity, the 
stability and the interference. If it is flame, the suitable w avelength, slit width and flame temperature, the addition 
of complexing agents and releasing agents and the use of Standard addit ion method may eliminate interference. If 
it is furnace, system, the selection of suitable background compensat ion system and the addition of suitable matrix 
modifying agents, etc may remove the interference. Background compe nsation method shall be selected as 
specified in the individual monograph. 
 
Procedure 
 
Method  (direct calibration method)   CCXCVII   
Prepare not less than 3 reference solutions of the element being exa mined of different concentrations, 
covering the range recommended by the instrument manufacturer and add s eparately the corresponding reagents as 
that for the test solution and prepare the blank reference solution wi th the corresponding reagents. Measure the 
absorbances of the blank reference solution and each reference solution of different concentrations separately, 
record the readings and prepare a calibration curve with the avera ge value of 3 readings of each concentration on 
the ordinate and the corresponding concentration on the abscissa. 
 
Prepare a test solution of the substance being examined as specifie d in the monograph, adjust the 
concentration to fall within the concentration range of the reference  solution. Measure the absorbance 3 times, 
record the readings and calculate the average value. Interpolate the mean value of the readings on the calibration 
curve to determine the concentration of the element. 
 
When used in the test for impurities, prepare two test preparations of the same concentration as specified in 
the monograph. To one of the test preparation add an amount of the reference  substance equivalent to the limit of 
the element specified in the monograph. Proceed as directed above and measure this  solution to give an appropriate 
reading a; then measure the test preparation without the addition of t he reference substance under the same 
condition and record the reading b; b is not greater than (a-b).  
 
2.3.8. -  Determination of Lead, Cadmium, Arsenic, Mercury and Copper 
 
(1) Determination of Lead(Pb) (Graphite Oven Method): 
 
Determination conditions: Reference condition: dry temperature: 100-120 0, maintain 20 seconds; ash 
temperature: 400-750 0, maintain 20-25 seconds; atomic temperature: 1700-2100 0 , maintain 4-5 seconds; 
measurement wavelength: 283.3 nm; background calibration: deuterium lamp (D lamp) or Z eeman effect. 
 
Preparation of lead standard stock solution:  Measure accurately a quantity of lead single-element standard 
solution to prepare standard stock solution with 2 per cent nitric acid s olution, which containing 1 µg per ml, stored 
at 0-50. 
 
Preparation of calibration curve: Measure accurately a quantity of lead standard stock solutions res pectively, 
diluted with 2 per cent nitric acid solution to the concentration of 0, 5, 20, 40, 60, 80 ng per ml, respectively. 
Measure respectively accurately 1 ml the above solution, add respe ctively 1 ml of 1 per cent ammonium 
dihydrogen phosphate and 0.2 per cent magnesium nitrate  mix well, pipette accurately 20 µl to inject into the 
atomic generator of graphite oven and determine their absorbance, then draw the cali bration curve with absorbance 
as vertical axis and concentration as horizontal ordinate. 
 
Preparation of test solution 
  
Method 
 
 Weigh accurately 0.5 g of the coarse powder of the substance being exa mined, transfer into a casparian 
flask, add 5-10 ml of the mixture of nitric acid  and perchloric acid  (4 : 1), add a small hopper on the flask-top, 
macerate overnight, heat to slake on the electric hot plate, kee p somewhat-boiling, if brownish-black, add again a 
quantity of the above mixture, continuously heat till the solution becomes clean and transparent, then raise 
temperature, heat continuously to thick smoke, till white smoke dispe rse, the slaked solution becomes colourless 
and transparent or a little yellow, cool, transfer it into a 50 ml volumetric flask, wash the container with 2 per cent 
nitric acid solution  add the washing solution into the same volumetric flask and dilute w ith the same solvent to the 
volume, shake well. Prepare synchronously the reagent blank solution according to the abov e procedure.  
  CCXCVIII  Determination:  Measure accurately 1 ml of the test solution and its corresponding reagent blank solution 
respectively, add 1 ml of solution containing 1per cent ammonium dihydrogen phosphate  and 0.2 per cent 
magnesium nitrate , shake well, pipette accurately 10-20 µl to determine their absorba nce according to the above 
method of “Preparation of calibration curve”. Calculate the content of  lead (Pd) in the test solution from the 
calibration curve. 
 
 
(2) Determination of Cadmium (Cd) (Graphite Oven Method)  
 
Determination conditions:  Reference condition: dry temperature: 100-120 0 , maintain 20 seconds; ash 
temperature: 300-500 0 , maintain 20-25 seconds; atomic temperature: 1500-1900 0, maintain 4-5 seconds; 
measurement wavelength: 228.8 nm; background calibration: deuterium lamp (D lamp) or Z eeman effect. 
 
 Preparation of Cd standard stock solution:  Measure accurately a quantity of Cd single-element standard 
solution to prepare standard stock solution Cd with 2 per cent nitric ac id, which containing 0.4 µg per ml Cd, 
stored at 0-50. 
 
Preparation of calibration curve:  Measure accurately a quantity of cadmium standard stock solutions, di luted to 
the concentration of 1.6, 3.2, 4.8, 6.4 and 8.0 ng per ml with 2 per cent nitric acid, respectively. Pipette accurately 
10 µl the above solutions respectively, inject them into the graphite  oven, determine their absorbance, and then 
draw the calibration curve with absorbance as vertical axis and concentration as hor izontal ordinate. 
 
Preparation of test solution:   Reference to “Preparation of test solution” of Pb in the above. 
 
Determination:  Pipette accurately 10-20 µl of the test solution and its corresponding reagent blank solution 
respectively, determine their absorbance according to the above met hod of “Preparation of calibration curve. If 
interference occurs, weigh accurately respectively 1 ml of the  standard solution, blank solution and test solution, 
add 1 ml of a solution containing 1per cent ammonium dihydrogen phosphate  and 0.2 per cent magnesium nitrate , 
shake well, determine their  absorbance according to the method above, calculate the content of Cd in the test 
solution from the calibration curve. 
 
(3) Determination of Arsenic (As) (Hydride Method) 
 
Determination conditions: Apparatus: suitable hydride generator device, reducing agent: a solut ion containing 1 
per cent sodium borohydride  and 0.3 per cent sodium hydroxide ; carrier liquid: 1 per cent hydrochloric acid ; carrier 
gas: nitrogen; measurement wavelength: 193.7 nm; background calibration:  deuterium lamp (D lamp) or Zeeman 
effect. 
 
Preparation of As standard stock solution:  Measure accurately a quantity of As single-element standard soluti on 
to prepare standard stock solution with 2 per cent nitric acid  solution, which containis 1.0 µg per ml As, stored at 
0-50. 
 
Preparation of calibration curve:  Measure accurately proper quantity of arsenic standard stock solutions, dil uted 
with 2 per cent nitric acid  to the concentration of 2, 4, 8, 12 and 16 ng per ml respectively. Accurate ly transfer 10 
ml of each into 25 ml volumetric flask respectively, add 1 ml of 25 per cent potassium iodide solution  (prepared 
prior to use), shake well, add 1 ml of ascorbic acid solution  (prepared prior to use), shake well, dilute with 
hydrochloric acid solution (20-100) to the volume, shake well, close the s topper and immerse the flask in a water 
bath at 80 0 for 3 minutes. Cool, transfer proper quantities of each solution respect ively into the hydride generator 
device, determine the absorbance, then plot the calibration curve with peak area (absorbance) as vertical axis and 
concentration as horizontal ordinate. 
  CCXCIX  Preparation of test solution:   Reference to A or B method of “Preparation of test solution” of Pb in the above. 
 
Determination:  Pipette accurately 10 ml of the test solution and its corresponding reagent blank solution 
respectively, proceed as described under “Preparation of calibration curve” beginning at the words “add 1 ml of 25 
per cent potassium iodide solution ”. Calculate the content of As in the test solution from the calibration curve. 
 
(4) Determination of Mercury (Hg) (Cold Absorption Method) 
 
Determination conditions:  Apparatus: suitable hydride generator device; reducing agent: a sol ution 
containing 0.5 per cent sodium borohydride  and 0.1 per cent sodium hydroxide ; carrier liquid: 1 per cent 
hydrochloric acid ; carrier gas: nitrogen; measurement wavelength: 253.6 nm; backgr ound calibration: deuterium 
lamp (D lamp) or Zeeman effect. 
 
Preparation of mercury standard stock solution:   Measure accurately a proper quantity of mercury single-
element standard solution to prepare standard stock solution with 2 per c ent nitric acid solution, which containing 
1.0 µg per ml Hg, stored at 0-50. 
 
Preparation of calibration curve:  Measure accurately 0, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 and 0.9 ml of mercury standard stock 
solution, transfer into a 50 ml volumetric flask respectively, add 40 ml 4 per cent sulphuric acid  solution  and 0.5 
ml of 5 per cent potassium permanganate solution , shake well, drop 5 per cent hydroxylamine hydrochloride 
solution  until the violet red just disappears, dilute with 4 per cent sulfuric acid solution  to the volume, shake well. 
A quantity of each solution is injected to the hydride generator devic e, determine the absorbance, then plot the 
calibration curve with peak area (absorbance) as vertical axis and concentrat ion as horizontal ordinate. 
 
Preparation of test solution   
 
Method 
 Transfer 1 g of the coarse powder of the substance being examined, acc urately weighed, into a casparian 
flask, add 5-10 ml of the mixture solution of nitric acid  and perchloric acid  (4 : 1), mix well, fix a small hopper on 
the flask-top, immerse overnight, heat to slake on the electric hot plate at 120-140 0 for 4-8 hours until slaking  
completely, cool, add a quantity of 4 per cent sulfuric acid solution  and 0.5 ml of 5 per cent potassium 
permanganate solution , shake well, drop 5 per cent hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution  until the violet red 
colour just disappears, dilute with 4 per cent sulphuric acid  solution s to 25 ml, shake well, centrifugate if 
necessary, the supernatant is used as the test solution. Prepare sy nchronally the reagent blank solute based on the 
same procedure.  
 
 Determination: Pipette accurately a quantity of the test solution and its corres ponding reagent blank solution, 
respectively, proceed as described under “Preparation of calibration curve” beginning at the words “add 1 ml of 25 
per cent potassium iodide solution ”. Calculate the content of mercury (Hg) in the test solution from  the calibration 
curve. 
 
(5) Determination of Copper(Cu) (Flame Method) 
 
Determination conditions:  Measurement wavelength: 324.7 nm; flame: air -acetylene flame;  background 
calibration: deuterium lamp or Zeeman effect. 
 
 Preparation of copper standard stock solution:  Measure accurately a proper quantity of copper single-
element standard solution, to prepare the standard stock solution with 2 pe r cent nitric acid solution , which 
containing 10 µg per ml Cu, stored at 0-50. 
  CCC  Preparation of calibration curve:  Measure accurately a quantity of copper standard stock solutions, dilute wi th 2 
per cent nitric acid to the concentrations of 0.05, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8 µg per ml, respectively. Inject each standard 
solution into the flame and determine the absorbance, respective, then plot the cal ibration curve with absorbance as 
vertical axis and concentration as horizontal ordinate. 
 
Preparation of test solution: Reference to “Preparation of test solution” of Pb in the above. 
 
Determination: Pipette accurately quantities of the test solution and its corres ponding reagent blank solution 
respectively, proceed as described under “Preparation of calibration curve”. Calculate the content of Cu in the test 
solution from the calibration curve. 
 
2.3.9 Determination of Calcium Oxide 
  
Apparatus 
 
(1) Calibrated Brix spindle 
(2) Brix Cylinder 
(3) Conical flasks - 250 ml capacity 
(4) Beakers – 100 and 200 ml capacity 
(5) Funnels 
(6) Pipettes- calibrated at 10 ml 
 
Reagents 
 
(1) EDTA solution – Weigh accurately 6.6473 gm EDTA into a beaker , dissolve in distille d water   and make upto 
1000 ml to obtain exactly M / 56 solution 
(2) Ammonia Liquor 
(3) Lead Subacetate 
(4) Potassium Ferrocyanide powder 
(5) Potassium iodide 
(6) Eriochrome Black – T – weigh 0.1 eriochrome black T in a 100 ml volumetric flask and dis solve the same in 
rectified spirit or absolute alcohol. Make upto volume and use as indicator 
 
Procedure 
 
Make a 15 0 Brix solution of the sample. Transfer about 150 ml of the sol ution to a conical flask. Clarify 
the solution with Lead subacetate. Transfer about 60 ml of the clarif ied solution to a dry conical flask or flask 
previously rinsed with the clarified solution. Add Potassium Ferrocya nide powder little by little till no further 
precipitate forms. Shake thoroughly and filter. Test the filterate  with Pot. Iodide.. Collect the lead free filterate in a 
conical flask Pipette out 10 ml of lead free  filterate in a clean conical flask previously rinsed with distilled water 
and dried. Add 5 – 6 drops of liquor ammonia and 4-5 drops of indicator when a pink c olour appears. Titrate 
against EDTA solution shaking the flask after each addition of ED TA solution. The end point is indicated by a 
sharp change of colour from red to blue. Note down the volume of the titrant 
 
Calculation 
 
Calcium oxide mg / 100 gm = V X 100 mg per litre of diluted solution 
 
(Ref :- I.S.I. Handbook of Food Analysis (Part II) – 1984 page 9) 
 
  CCCI  2.4. - MICROBIAL LIMIT TESTS  
The following tests are designed for the estimation of the number of  viable aerobic micro-organisms 
present and for detecting the presence of designated microbial speci es in pharmaceutical substances. The term 
‘growth’ is used to designate the presence and presumed proliferation of viable micr o-organisms. 
 
Preliminary Testing  
 
The methods given herein are invalid unless it is demonstrated that  the test specimens to which they are 
applied do not, of themselves, inhibit the multiplication under the test c onditions of micro-organisms that can be 
present. Therefore, prior to doing the tests, inoculate diluted specimens  of the substance being examined with 
separate viable cultures of Escherichia coli , Salmonella species, Pseudomonas aeruginosa  and Staphylococcus 
aureus . This is done by adding 1 ml of not less than 10 -3 dilutions of a 24 h broth culture of the micro-organisms to 
the first dilution (in buffer solution pH 7.2, fluid soyabean-casein diges t medium or fluid lactose medium) of the 
test material and following the test procedure. If the organisms fail to grow in the relevant medium the procedure 
should be modified by (a) increasing the volume of diluent with the quantity of tes t material remaining the same, or 
(b) incorporating a sufficient quantity of a suitable inactivating agent in the diluents, or (c) combining the 
aforementioned modifications so as to permit growth of the organisms in the media. If inhibitory substances are 
present in the sample, 0.5 per cent of soya lecithin and 4 per cent of pol ysorbate 20 may be added to the culture 
medium. Alternatively, repeat the test as described in the previ ous paragraph, using fluid casein digest-soya 
lecithin-polysorbate 20 medium to demonstrate neutralization of preserv atives or other antimicrobial agents in the 
test material. Where inhibitory substances are contained in the produc t and the latter is soluble, the Membrane 
filtration method described under Total Aerobic Microbial Count may be used. 
 
If in spite of incorporation of suitable inactivating agents and a s ubstantial increase in the volume of 
diluent it is still not possible to recover the viable cultures de scribed above and where the article is not suitable for 
applying the membrane filtration method it can be assumed that the f ailure to isolate the inoculated organism may 
be due to the bactericidal activity of the product. This may indicat e that the article is not likely to be contaminated 
with the given species of micro-organisms. However, monitoring shoul d be continued to establish the spectrum of 
inhibition and bactericidal activity of the article. 
  
Media  
 
Culture media may be prepared as given below or dehydrated culture me dia may be used provided 
that, when reconstituted as directed by the manufacturer, they have si milar ingredients and / or yield 
media comparable to those obtained from the formulae given below. 
 
Where agar is specified in a formula, use agar that has a mois ture content of not more than 15 per cent. 
Where water is called for in a formula, use purified water. Unle ss otherwise indicated, the media should be 
sterilized by heating in an autoclave at 115 0 for 30 minutes. 
 
In preparing media by the formulas given below, dissolve the soluble s olids in the water, using heat if 
necessary, to effect complete solution and add solutions of hydrochloric a cid or sodium hydroxide in quantities 
sufficient to yield the required pH in the medium when it is ready for use. Determine the pH at 25 0 ± 2 0. 
 
Baird-Parker Agar Medium 
 
 Pancreatic digest of casein   10.0 g 
 Beef extract       5.0 g 
 Yeast extract       1.0 g 
 Lithium chloride      5.0 g  CCCII   Agar      20.0 g 
 Glycine      12.0 g 
 Sodium pyruvate    10.0 g 
 Water to     1000 ml 
 
Heat with frequent agitation and boil for 1 minute. Sterilise, cool t o between 45 0 and 50 0, and add 10 ml of 
a one per cent w/v solution of sterile potassium tellurite  and 50 ml of egg-yolk emulsion. Mix intimately but gently 
and pour into plates. (Prepare the egg-yolk emulsion by disinfecting t he surface of whole shell eggs, aseptically 
cracking the eggs, and separating out intact yolks into a sterile graduate d cylinder. Add sterile saline solution, get a 
3 to 7 ratio of egg-yolk to saline. Add to a sterile blender cup, and m ix at high speed for 5 seconds). Adjust the pH 
after sterilization to 6.8 ± 0.2. 
 
Bismuth Sulphite Agar Medium 
 
Solution (1) 
 
 Beef extract      6 g 
 Peptone       10 g 
 Agar       24 g 
 Ferric citrate      0.4 g 
 Brilliant green      10 mg 
 Water to       1000 ml 
 
Dissolve with the aid of heat and sterilise by maintaining at 115º for 30 minutes. 
 
 
Solution (2) 
 
  
Ammonium bismuth citrate     3 g 
            Sodium sulphite      10 g 
 Anhydrous disodium hydrogen Phosphate  5 g 
  
 Dextrose monohydrate     5 g 
 Water to       100 ml 
 
Mix, heat to boiling, cool to room temperature, add 1 volume of solution (2) t o 10 volumes of solution (1) 
previously melted and cooled to a temperature of 55  0  and pour. 
 
Bismuth Sulphite Agar Medium should be stored at 2 0 to 8 0 for 5 days before use. 
 
Brilliant Green Agar Medium 
 
 Peptone       10.0 g 
 Yeast extract      3.0 g 
 Lactose       10.0 g 
 Sucrose       10.0 g 
 Sodium chloride     5.0 g 
 Phenol red      80.0 g 
 Brilliant green      12.5 mg 
 Agar       12.0 g  CCCIII   Water to      1000 ml 
 
Mix, allow to stand for 15 minutes, sterilise by maintaining at 115 0 for 30 minutes and mix before pouring. 
 
Buffered Sodium Chloride-Peptone Solution pH 7.0 
 
 Potassium dihydrogen phosphate   3.56 g 
 Disodium hydrogen phosphate    7.23 g 
 Sodium chloride     4.30 g 
 Peptone (meat or casein)    1.0 g 
 Water to       1000 ml 
 
0.1 to 1.0 per cent w/v polysorbate 20 or polysorbate 80 may be added. Sterilise  by heating in an autoclave 
at 121 0 for 15 minutes. 
 
Casein Soyabean Digest Agar Medium 
 
 Pancreatic digest of casein    15.0 g 
 Papaic digest of soyabean meal    5.0 g 
 Sodium chloride      5.0 g 
 Agar       15.0 g 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Adjust the pH after sterilization to 7.3±0.2. 
 
Cetrimide Agar Medium 
 
 Pancreatic digest of gelatin    20.0 g 
 Magnesium chloride     1.4 g 
 Potassium sulphate     10.0 g 
 Cetrimide      0.3 g 
 Agar       13.6 g 
 Glycerin      10.0 g 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Heat to boiling for 1 minute with shaking. Adjust the pH so that after sterilization it is 7.0 to 7.4. Sterilise 
at 121 0 for 15 minutes. 
 
Desoxycholate-Citrate Agar Medium 
 
 Beef extract      5.0 g 
 Peptone       5.0 g 
 Lactose       10.0 g 
 Trisodium citrate     8.5 g 
 Sodium thiosulphate     5.4 g 
 Ferric citrate      1.0 g 
 Sodium desoxycholate     5.0 g 
 Neutral red      0.02 g 
 Agar       12.0 g 
 Water to       1000 ml 
  CCCIV  Mix and allow to stand for 15 minutes. With continuous stirring, bring gentl y to the boil and maintain at 
boiling point until solution is complete. Cool to 80 0, mix, pour and cool rapidly. 
 
Care should be taken not to overheat Desoxycholate Citrate Agar duri ng preparation. It should not be 
remelted and the surface of the plates should be dried before use. 
 
Fluid Casein Digest-Soya Lecithin-Polysorbate 20 Medium 
 
 Pancreatic digest of casein    20 g 
 Soya lecithin      5 g 
 Polysorbate 20      40 ml 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Dissolve the pancreatic digest of casein and soya lecithin in wa ter, heating in a water-bath at 48 0 to 50 0 for 
about 30 minutes to effect solution. Add polysorbate 20, mix and dispense as desired. 
 
Fluid Lactose Medium 
 
 Beef extract      3.0 g 
 Pancreatic digest of gelatin    5.0 g 
 Lactose       5.0 g 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Cool as quickly as possible after sterilization. Adjust the pH after sterili zation to         6.9 ± 0.2. 
 
Lactose Broth Medium 
 
 Beef extract      3.0 g 
 Pancreatic digest of gelatin    5.0 g 
 Lactose       5.0 g 
 Water to       1000 ml 
 
Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 6.9±0.2. 
 
Levine Eosin-Methylene Blue Agar Medium 
 
 Pancreatic digest of gelatin    10.0 g 
 Dibasic potassium phosphate    2.0 g 
 Agar       15.0 g 
 Lactose       10.0 g 
 Eosin Y       400   mg 
 Methylene blue        65   mg 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Dissolve the pancreatic digest of gelatin, dibasic potassium phosphat e and agar in water with warming and 
allow to cool. Just prior to use, liquefy the gelled agar solution and the remaining ingredients, as solutions, in the 
following amounts and mix. For each 100 ml of the liquefied agar solution use 5 ml of  a 20 per cent w/v solution of 
lactose, and 2 ml of a 2 per cent w/v solution of eosin Y, and 2 ml of a  0.33 per cent w/v solution of methylene 
blue. The finished medium may not be clear. Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 7.1±0.2. 
 
  CCCV   
 
 
MacConkey Agar Medium 
 
Pancreatic digest of gelatin    17.0 g 
 Peptone (meat and casein,     3.0 g 
equal parts)  
 Lactose       10.0 g 
 Sodium chloride     5.0 g 
 Bile salts      1.5 g 
 Agar       13.5 g 
 Neutral red      30 mg 
 Crystal violet      1 mg 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Boil the mixture of solids and water for 1 minute to effect solution. Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 7.1 
± 0.2. 
 
MacConkey Broth Medium 
 
Pancreatic digest of gelatin    20.0 g 
 Lactose       10.0 g 
 Dehydrated ox bile     5.0 g 
 Bromocresol purple     10 mg 
 Water to      1000  ml 
 
Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 7.3±0.2. 
 
Mannitol-Salt Agar Medium 
 
Pancreatic digest of gelatin    5.0 g 
 Peptic digest of animal tissue    5.0 g 
 Beef extract      1.0 g 
 D-Mannitol      10.0 g 
 Sodium chloride     75.0 g 
 Agar       15.0 g 
 Phenol red      25 mg 
 Water to      1000  ml 
 
Mix, heat with frequent agitation and boil for 1 minute to effect solut ion. Adjust the pH after sterilisation 
to 7.4 ± 0.2. 
 
Nutrient Agar Medium : Nutrient broth gelled by the addition of 1 to 2 per cent w/v of agar. 
 
Nutrient Broth Medium 
 
Beef extract     10.0 g 
 Peptone      10.0 g 
 Sodium chloride    5 mg 
 Water to     1000  ml  CCCVI   
Dissolve with the aid of heat. Adjust the pH to 8.0 to 8.4 with 5M sodium hydroxide  and boil for 10 
minutes. Filter, and sterilise by maintaining at 115 0 for 30 minutes and adjust the pH to 7.3±0.1. 
 
Pseudomonas Agar Medium for Detection of Flourescein 
 
Pancreatic digest of casein   10.0 g 
 Peptic digest of animal tissue   10.0 g 
 Anhydrous dibasic potassium phosphate 1.5 g 
 Magnesium sulphate hepta hydrate  1.5 g 
 Glycerin     10.0 ml 
 Agar      15.0 g 
 Water to     1000 ml 
 
Dissolve the solid components in water before adding glycerin. Heat with frequent agitation and boil for 1 
minute to effect solution. Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 7.2±0.2. 
 
Pseudomonas Agar Medium for Detection of Pyocyanin 
 
Pancreatic digest of gelatin   20.0 g 
 Anhydrous magnesium chloride   1.4 g 
 Anhydrous potassium sulphate   10.0 g 
 Agar      15.0 g 
Glycerin     10.0 ml 
 Water to     1000 ml 
 
Dissolve the solid components in water before adding glycerin. Heat with frequent agitation and boil for 1 
minute to effect solution. Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 7.2±0.2. 
 
Sabouraud Dextrose Agar Medium 
 
 Dextrose     40 g 
 Mixture of equal parts of peptic  
digest of animal tissue and  
 Pancreatic digest of casein   10 g 
 Agar      15 g 
 Water to     1000 ml 
 
Mix, and boil to effect solution. Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 5.6 ± 0.2. 
 
Sabouraud Dextrose Agar Medium with Antibiotics 
 
To 1 liter of Sabouraud Dextrose Agar Medium add 0.1 g of benzylpenicilli n sodium and 0.1 g of 
tetracycline or alternatively add 50 mg of chloramphenicol immediately before  use. 
 
Selenite F Broth 
 
 Peptone     5 g 
 Lactose     4 g 
 Disodium hydrogen phosphate  10 g 
 Sodium hydrogen selenite  4 g  CCCVII   Water to     1000 ml 
 
Dissolve, distribute in sterile containers and sterilise by maintaining at 100º  for 30 minutes. 
 
 
 
Fluid Selenite-Cystine Medium 
 
 Pancreatic digest of casein   5.0 g 
 Lactose      4.0 g 
 Sodium phosphate    10.0 g 
 Sodium hydrogen selenite   4.0 g 
 L-Cystine      10.0 mg 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Mix and heat to effect solution. Heat in flowing steam for 15 minutes . Adjust the final pH to 7.0±0.2. Do 
not sterilise. 
 
Tetrathionate Broth Medium 
 
 Beef extract     0.9 g 
 Peptone      4.5 g 
 Yeast extract     1.8 g 
 Sodium chloride    4.5 g 
 Calcium carbonate    25.0 g 
 Sodium thiosulphate    40.7 g 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Dissolve the solids in water and heat the solution to boil. On the day of use, add a solution prepared by 
dissolving 5 g of potassium iodide and 6 g of iodine in 20 ml of water. 
 
Tetrathionate-Bile-Brilliant Green Broth Medium 
 
 Peptone      8.6 g 
 Dehydrated ox bile    8.0 g 
 Sodium chloride    6.4 g 
 Calcium carbonate    20.0 g 
 Potassium tetrathionate    20.0 g 
 Brilliant green     70 mg 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Heat just to boiling; do not reheat. Adjust the pH so that after heating it is 7.0±0.2. 
 
Triple Sugar-Iron Agar Medium 
 
 Beef extract     3.0 g 
 Yeast extract     3.0 g 
 Peptone      20.0 g 
 Lactose      10.0 g 
 Sucrose      10.0 g 
 Dextrose monohydrate    1.0 g  CCCVIII   Ferrous sulphate    0.2 g 
 Sodium chloride    5.0 g 
 Sodium thiosulphate    0.3 g 
 Phenol red     24 mg 
 Agar      12.0 g 
 Water to     1000 ml 
 
Mix, allow standing for 15 minutes, bringing to boil and maintain at boiling  point until solution is 
complete, mix, distributing in tubes and sterilising by maintaining at  115 0 for 30 minutes. Allow to stand in a 
sloped form with a butt about 2.5 cm long. 
 
Urea Broth Medium 
 
 Potassium dihydrogen     9.1 g 
orthophosphate  
Anhydrous disodium hydrogen   9.5 g 
phosphate 
Urea      20.0 g 
Yeast extract     0.1 g 
Phenol red     10 mg 
Water to      1000 ml 
 
Mix, sterilise by filtration and distribute aseptically in sterile containe rs. 
 
Vogel-Johnson Agar Medium 
 
 Pancreatic digest of casein   10.0 g 
 Yeast extract     5.0 g 
 Mannitol     10.0 g 
 Dibasic potassium phosphate   5.0 g 
 Lithium chloride    5.0 g 
 Glycerin     10.0 g 
 Agar      16.0 g 
 Phenol red     25.0 mg 
 Water to     1000 ml 
 
Boil the solution of solids for 1 minute. Sterilise, cool to between 450 to 50 0 and add 20 ml of a 1 per cent w/v 
sterile solution of potassium tellurite. Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 7.0±0.2. 
 
Xylose-Lysine-Desoxycholate Agar Medium 
 
 Xylose      3.5 g 
 L-Lysine      5.0 g 
 Lactose      7.5 g 
 Sucrose      7.5 g 
 Sodium chloride    5.0 g 
 Yeast extract     3.0 g 
 Phenol red     80 mg 
 Agar      13.5 g 
 Sodium desoxycholate    2.5 g 
 Sodium thiosulphate    6.8 g  CCCIX   Ferric ammonium citrate   800 mg 
 Water to     1000 ml 
 
Heat the mixture of solids and water, with swirling, just to the boi ling point. Do not overheat or sterilise. 
Transfer at once to a water-bath maintained at about 50 0 and pour into plates as soon as the medium has cooled. 
Adjust the final pH to 7.4 ± 0.2. 
 
Sampling:  Use 10 ml or 10 g specimens for each of the tests specified in the individual monograph. 
 
Precautions:  The microbial limit tests should be carried out under conditions desig ned to avoid accidental 
contamination during the test. The precautions taken to avoid contaminati on must be such that they do not 
adversely affect any micro-organisms that should be revealed in the test. 
 
2.4.1. - Total Aerobic Microbial Count 
 
Pretreat the sample of the product being examined as described below. 
 
Water-soluble products:  Dissolve 10 g or dilute 10 ml of the preparation being examined, unless otherwise 
specified, in buffered sodium chloride-peptone solution pH 7.0 or any other suitable medium shown to have no 
antimicrobial activity under the conditions of test and adjust the vol ume to 100 ml with the same medium. If 
necessary, adjust the pH to about 7. 
 
Products insoluble in water (non-fatty):  Suspend 10 g or 10 ml of the preparation being examined, unless 
otherwise specified, in buffered sodium chloride-peptone solution pH 7.0 or any other suitable medium shown not 
to have antimicrobial activity under the conditions of the test and di lute to 100 ml with the same medium. If 
necessary, divide the preparation being examined and homogenize the suspension mechanical ly. 
 
A suitable surface-active agent such as 0.1 per cent w/v of polys orbate 80 may be added to assist the 
suspension of poorly wettable substances. If necessary, adjust the pH of the suspension to a bout 7. 
 
Fatty products:  Homogenise 10 g or 10 ml of the preparation being examined, unless otherwi se specified, with 5 
g of polysorbate 20 or polysorbate 80. If necessary, heat to not more than 40 0. Mix carefully while maintaining the 
temperature in the water-bath or in an oven. Add 85 ml of buffered sodium chloride-pept one solution pH 7.0 or any 
other suitable medium shown to have no antimicrobial activity under the  conditions of the test, heated to not more 
than 40 0 if necessary. Maintain this temperature for the shortest time necessary f or formation of an emulsion and in 
any case for not more than 30 minutes. If necessary, adjust the pH to about 7. 
 
Examination of the sample: Determine the total aerobic microbial count in the substance being e xamined by any 
of the following methods. 
 
Membrane filtration: Use membrane filters 50 mm in diameter and having a nominal pore s ize not greater than 
0.45 µm the effectiveness of which in retaining bacteria has been e stablished for the type of preparation being 
examined.  
 
Transfer 10 ml or a quantity of each dilution containing 1 g of the prepa ration being examined to each of 
two membrane filters and filter immediately. If necessary, di lute the pretreated preparation so that a colony count 
of 10 to 100 may be expected. Wash each membrane by filtering through it three or more successive quantities, 
each of about 100 ml, of a suitable liquid such as buffered sodium chloride-peptone solution pH 7.0.  For fatty 
substances add to the liquid polysorbate 20 or polysorbate 80.  Transfer one of the membrane filters, intended for 
the enumeration of bacteria, to the surface of a plate of casein soyabean digest agar and the other, intended for the 
enumeration of fungi, to the surface of a plate of Sabouraud dextrose agar with antibiotics .  CCCX   
Incubate the plates for 5 days, unless a more reliable count is obtai ned in shorter time, at 30 0 to 35 0 in the 
test for bacteria and 20 0 to 25 0 in the test for fungi. Count the number of colonies that are formed. Ca lculate the 
number of micro-organisms per g or per ml of the preparation being exa mined, if necessary counting bacteria and 
fungi separately. 
 
Plate count for bacteria:  Using Petri dishes 9 to 10 cm in diameter, add to each dish a mixture  of 1 ml of the 
pretreated preparation and about 15 ml of liquefied casein soyabean digest agar at not more than 45 0. 
Alternatively, spread the pretreated preparation on the surface of the solidified medium in a Petri dish of the same 
diameter. If necessary, dilute the pretreated preparation as desc ribed above so that a colony count of not more than 
300 may be expected. Prepare at least two such Petri dishes using the same di lution and incubate at 30 0 to 35 0 for 5 
days, unless a more reliable count is obtained in a shorter time. Count  the number of colonies that are formed. 
Calculate the results using plates with the greatest number of colonies but taking 300 colonies per plate as the 
maximum consistent with good evaluation. 
 
Plate count for fungi:  Proceed as described in the test for bacteria but use Sabouraud dextrose agar with 
antibiotics in place of casein soyabean digest agar and incubate the plates at 20 0 to 25 0 for 5 days, unless a more 
reliable count is obtained in a shorter time. Calculate the results using plates w ith not more than 100 colonies. 
 
Multiple-tube or serial dilution method: In each of fourteen test-tubes of similar size place 9.0 ml of sterile fluid 
soyabean casein digest medium. Arrange twelve of the tubes in four sets of three tubes each. Put aside one set of 
three tubes to serve as controls. Into each of three tubes of one set  (“100”) and into fourth tube (A) pipette 1 ml of 
the solution of suspension of the test specimen and mix. From tube A pipett e 1 ml of its contents into the one 
remaining tube (B) not included in the set and mix. These two tubes conta in 100 mg (or 100 µl) and 10 mg (or 10 
µl) of the specimen respectively. Into each of the second set (“10”) of three tubes pi pette 1 ml from tube  
 
A, and into each tube of the third set (“1”) pipette 1 ml from tube B. Discard the unused contents  of tube A 
and B. Close well and incubate all of the tubes. Following the incubation period, examine the tubes for growth. The 
three control tubes remain clear. Observations in the tubes containing  the test specimen, when interpreted by 
reference to Table 2.3, indicate the most probable number of micro-organisms per g or per  ml of the test specimen. 
 
Table 2.3 – Most Probable Total Count by Multiple-Tube Or Serial Dilution Met hod 
 
Observed combination of numbers of 
tubes showing growth in each set   
No.of mg (or ml) of specimen per 
tube  Most probable number of micro-
organisms per g or per ml 
100 
(100 µl) 10 
(10 µl) 1 
(1 µl)  
3 
3 
3 
3 3 
3 
3 
3 3 
2 
1 
0 >1100 
1100 
500 
200 
3 
3 
3 
3 2 
2 
2 
2 3 
2 
1 
0 290 
210 
150 
90  CCCXI  3 
3 
3 
3 1 
1 
1 
1 3 
2 
1 
0 160 
120 
70 
40 
3 
3 
3 
3 0 
0 
0 
0 3 
2 
1 
0 95 
60 
40 
23 
 
 
2.4.2. - Tests for Specified Micro-Organisms 
 
Pretreatment of the sample being examined:  Proceed as described under the test for total aerobic microbial 
count but using lactose broth or any other suitable medium shown to have no a ntimicrobial activity under the 
conditions of test in place of buffered sodium chloride-peptone solution pH 7.0. 
 
Escherichia coli  : Place the prescribed quantity in a sterile screw-capped contai ner, add 50 ml of nutrient broth, 
shake, allow to stand for 1 hour (4 hours for gelatin) and shake again. L oosen the cap and incubate at 37  0  for 18 to 
24 hours. 
 
Primary test: Add 1.0 ml of the enrichment culture to a tube containing 5 ml of MacConke y broth. Incubate in a 
water-bath at 36 0 to 38 0 for 48 hours. If the contents of the tube show acid and gas carry out the secondary test. 
 
Secondary test:  Add 0.1 ml of the contents of the tubes containing (a) 5 ml of MacConkey broth, and (b) 5 ml of 
peptone water. Incubate in a water-bath at 43.5 0 to 44.5 0 for 24 hours and examine tube (a) for acid and gas and 
tube (b) for indole. To test for indole, add 0.5 ml of Kovac’s reagent, shake well a nd allow to stand for 1 minute; if 
a red colour is produced in the reagent layer indole is present. The pr esence of acid and gas and of indole in the 
secondary test indicates the presence of Escherichia coli . 
Carry out a control test by repeating the primary and secondary te sts adding 1.0 ml of the enrichment 
culture and a volume of broth containing 10 to 50 Escherichia coli  (NCTC 9002) organisms, prepared from a 24-
hour culture in nutrient broth, to 5 ml of MacConkey broth. The test is not valid unless the results indicate that the 
control contains Escherichia coli . 
 
Alternative test:   By means of an inoculating loop, streak a portion from the enrichment c ulture (obtained in the 
previous test) on the surface of MacConkey agar medium. Cover and i nvert the dishes and incubate. Upon 
examination, if none of the colonies are brick-red in colour and have a s urrounding zone of precipitated bile the 
sample meets the requirements of the test for the absence of Escherichia coli . 
 
If the colonies described above are found, transfer the suspect colonies  individually to the surface of 
Levine eosin-methylene blue agar medium, plated on Petri dishes. Cove r and invert the plates and incubate. Upon 
examination, if none of the colonies exhibits both a characteristic met allic sheen under reflected light and a blue-
black appearance under transmitted light, the sample meets the re quirements of the test for the absence of 
Escherichia coli . The presence of Escherichia coli  may be confirmed by further suitable cultural and biochemical 
tests. 
 
Salmonella  : Transfer a quantity of the pretreated preparation being examined c ontaining 1 g or 1 ml of the product 
to 100 ml of nutrient broth in a sterile screw-capped jar, shake, all ow to stand for 4 hours and shake again. Loosen 
the cap and incubate at 35 0 to 37 0 for 24 hours. 
  CCCXII  Primary test:  Add 1.0 ml of the enrichment culture to each of the two tubes containing ( a) 10 ml of selenite F 
broth and (b) tetrathionate-bile-brilliant green broth and incubate at 36 0 to 38 0 for 48 hours. From each of these two 
cultures subculture on at least two of the following four agar media : bismuth sulphate agar, brilliant green agar, 
deoxycholatecitrate agar and xylose-lysine-deoxycholate agar. Incubate  the plates at 36 0 to 38 0 for 18 to 24 hours. 
Upon examination, if none of the colonies conforms to the description given i n Table 2.4, the sample meets the 
requirements of the test for the absence of the genus Salmonella . 
 
If any colonies conforming to the description in Table 2.4 are produced, carry out the secondary t est. 
 
Secondary test: Subculture any colonies showing the characteristics given in Table 2.4 in triple s ugar-iron agar by 
first inoculating the surface of the slope and then making a stab culture w ith the same inoculating needle, and at the 
same time inoculate a tube of urea broth. Incubate at 36 0 to 38 0 for 18 to 24 hours. The formation of acid and gas in 
the stab culture (with or without concomitant blackening) and the absence of acidity fr om the surface growth in the 
triple sugar iron agar, together with the absence of a red colour i n the urea broth, indicate the presence of 
Salmonella . If acid but no gas is produced in the stab culture, the identity of the  organisms should be confirmed by 
agglutination tests. 
 
Carry out the control test by repeating the primary and secondary tests using 1.0 ml of  the enrichment culture and a 
volume of broth containing 10 to 50 Salmonella abony  (NCTC 6017) organisms, prepared from a 24-hour culture 
in nutrient broth, for the inoculation of the tubes (a) and (b). The test is not valid unless  the results indicate that the 
control contains Salmonella.  
Table 2.4 – Test for Salmonella  
 
Medium Description  of colony 
 
Bismuth sulphite agar 
 
Brilliant green agar 
 
 
 
Deoxycholate-citrate agar 
 
 
Xylose-lysine-desoxy-cholate agar Black or green 
 
Small, transparent and colourless, or opaque, 
pinkish or white (frequently surrounded by a 
pink or red zone) 
 
Colourless and opaque, with or without black 
centers  
 
Red with or without black centres 
 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa : Pretreat the preparation being examined as described above and inocul ate 100 ml of 
fluid soyabean-casein digest medium with a quantity of the solution, sus pension or emulsion thus obtained 
containing 1 g or 1 ml of the preparation being examined. Mix and incubate a t 35 0 to 37 0 for 24 to 48 hours. 
Examine the medium for growth and if growth is present, streak a por tion of the medium on the surface of 
cetrimide agar medium, each plated on Petri dishes. Cover and incubate at 35 0 to 37 0 for 18 to 24 hours. 
 
If, upon examination, none of the plates contains colonies having the charact eristics listed in Table 3 for 
the media used, the sample meets the requirement for freedom from Pseudomonas aeruginosa . If any colonies 
conforming to the description in Table 2.5 are produced, carry out the oxidase and pigent tests. 
 
Streak representative suspect colonies from the agar surface of cetrimide agar on the surfaces of 
Pseudomonas  agar medium for detection of fluorescein and Pseudomonas  agar medium for detection of pyocyanin 
contained in Petri dishes. Cover and invert the inoculated media and inc ubate at 33 0 to 37 0 for not less than 3 days. 
Examine the streaked surfaces under ultra-violet light. Examine t he plates to determine whether colonies 
conforming to the description in Table 2.5 are present.  CCCXIII   
If growth of suspect colonies occurs, place 2 or 3 drops of a freshly pr epared 1per cent w/v solution of 
N,N,N1,N1-tetramethyl-4-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride on filter paper and smea r with the colony; if there is 
no development of a pink colour, changing to purple, the sample meets the r equirements of the test for the absence 
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 
 
Table 2.4 – Tests for Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
 
Medium Characteristic 
colonial 
morphology Fluorescence 
in UV light Oxidase test Gram stain 
Cetrimide agar Generally 
greenish Greenish Positive Negative rods 
Pseudomonas agar 
medium for detection 
of fluorescein Generally 
colourless to 
yellowish  Yellowish Positive Negative rods 
Pseudomonas agar 
medium for detection 
of pyocyanin Generally 
greenish Blue Positive Negative rods 
 
 
Staphylococcus aureus : Proceed as described under Pseudomonas aeruginosa . If, upon examination of the 
incubated plates, none of them contains colonies having the characteristics  listed in Table 4 for the media used, the 
sample meets the requirements for the absence of Staphylococcus aureus . 
 
If growth occurs, carry out the coagulase test. Transfer represe ntative suspect colonies from the agar 
surface of any of the media listed in Table 2.5 to individual tubes, e ach containing 0.5 ml of mammalian, 
preferably rabbit or horse, plasma with or without additives. Incubate in water-bath at 37 0 examining the tubes at 3 
hours and subsequently at suitable intervals up to 24 hours. If no coagulation in a ny degree is observed, the sample 
meets the requirements of the test for the absence of Staphylococcus aureus . 
Table 2.5 – Tests for Staphylococcus aureus  
 
Selective medium Characteristic colonial morphology 
 Gram stain 
Vogel-Johnson agar Black surrounded by yellow zones Positive cocci (in 
clusters) 
Mannitol-salt agar Yellow colonies with yellow zones Positive cocci (in 
clusters) 
Baird-Parker agar Black, shiny, surrounded by clear zones of 2 
to 5 mm Positive cocci (in 
clusters) 
 
Validity of the tests  for total aerobic microbial count :  
 
Grow the following test strains separately in tubes containing fl uid soyabean-casein digest medium at 30 0 
to 35 0 for 18 to 24 hours or, for Candida albicans , at 20 0 for 48 hours. 
 
Staphylococcus aureus  (ATCC 6538; NCTC 10788) 
Bacillus subtilis   (ATCC 6633; NCIB 8054) 
Escherichia coli  (ATCC 8739; NCIB 8545) 
Candida albicans   (ATCC 2091; ATCC 10231)  CCCXIV   
Dilute portions of each of the cultures using buffered sodium chloride-peptone  solution pH 7.0 to make test 
suspensions containing about 100 viable micro-organisms per ml. Use the s uspension of each of the micro-
organisms separately as a control of the counting methods, in the pres ence and absence of the preparation being 
examined, if necessary. 
 
A count for any of the test organisms differing by not more than a f actor of 10 from the calculated value 
for the inoculum should be obtained. To test the sterility of the medium and of the diluent and the aseptic 
performance of the test, carry out the total aerobic microbial count  method using sterile buffered sodium chloride-
peptone solution pH 7.0 as the test preparation. There should be no growth of micro-organisms.  
 
Validity of the tests  for specified micro-organisms:  Grow separately the test strains of Staphylococcus aureus  
and Pseudomonas aeruginosa  in fluid soyabean-casein digest medium and Escherichia coli  and Salmonella 
typhimurium at 30 0 to 35 0 for 18 to 24 hours. Dilute portions of each of the cultures using buffered s odium 
chloride-peptone solution pH 7.0 to make test suspensions containing about 10 3 viable micro-organisms per ml. 
Mix equal volume of each suspension and use 0.4 ml (approximately 10 2 micro-organisms of each strain) as an 
inoculum in the test for E. coli, Salmonella , P. aeruginosa  and S. aureus , in the presence and absence of the 
preparation being examined, if necessary. A positive result for the respective strain of micro-organism should be 
obtained. 
 
Microbial Contamination Limits 
 
S.No.       Parameters                                     Permissible limits 
 
1.           Staphylococcus aureus /g.                 Absent  
2.           Salmonella  sp./g .                Absent 
3.   Pseudomonas aeruginosa /g   Absent 
4.           Escherichia coli                                  Absent 
5.           Total microbial plate count (TPC)                10 5/g*  
6.           Total Yeast & Mould                        10 3/g 
 
 
*For topical use, the limit shall be 10 7/g. 
 
2.5. - PESTICIDE RESIDUE  
 
Definition:  For the purposes of the Pharmacopoeia, a pesticide is any substance or mixture of substanc es intended 
for preventing, destroying or controlling any pest, unwanted species of pl ants or animals causing harm during or 
otherwise interfering with the production, processing, storage, transport  or marketing of vegetable drugs. The item 
includes substances intended for use as growth-regulators, defoliants or  desiccants and any substance applied to 
crops either before or after harvest to protect the commodity from deterioration dur ing storage and transport. 
 
Limits: Unless otherwise indicated in the monograph, the drug to be examined at l east complies with the limits 
indicated in Table -1, The limits applying to pesticides that are not listed in the table and whose presence is 
suspected for any reason comply with the limits set by European Comm unity directives 76/895 and 90/642, 
including their annexes and successive updates. Limits for pesticides  that are not listed in Table.-1 nor in EC 
directives are calculated using the following expression: 
 
                                                                 ADI x M  CCCXV                                                               MDD x 100 
 
 
ADI = Acceptable Daily Intake, as published by FAO-WHO, in milligrams per  
kilogram of body mass, 
 
M = body mass in kilograms (60 kg), 
 
MDD  = daily dose of the drug, in kilograms. 
 
If the drug is intended for the preparation of extracts, tinctures or other pharmaceutical forms whose 
preparation method modifies the content of pesticides in the finished produc t, the limits are calculated using the 
following expression: 
 
                                                             ADI x M x E 
                                                             MDD x 100 
 
E = Extraction factor of the method of preparation, determined experimentally. 
 
Higher limits can also be authorised, in exceptional cases, especia lly when a plant requires a particular 
cultivation method or has a metabolism or a structure that gives rise to a higher t han normal content of pesticides. 
 
The competent authority may grant total or partial exemption from t he test when the complete history 
(nature and quantity of the pesticides used, date of each treatment dur ing cultivation and after the harvest) of the 
treatment of the batch is known and can be checked precisely. 
 
Sampling 
 
Method:  For containers up to 1 kg, take one sample from the total content, thoroug hly mixed, sufficient for the 
tests. For containers between 1 kg and 5 kg, take three samples, equal in volum e, from the upper, middle and lower 
parts of the container, each being sufficient to carry out the test s. Thoroughly mix the samples and take from the 
mixture an amount sufficient to carry out the tests. For containers of more than 5 kg, take three samples, each of at 
least 250 g from the upper, middle and lower parts of the container. Thoroughly  mix the samples and take from the 
mixture an amount sufficient to carry out the tests.  
 
Size of sampling:  If the number (n) of containers is three or fewer, take samples from each container as indicated 
above under Method. If the number of containers is more than three, take n+1 samples for containers as indicated 
under Method, rounding up to the nearest unit if necessary. 
 
The samples are to be analysed immediately to avoid possible degr adation of the residues. If this is not possible, 
the samples are stored in air-tight containers suitable for food c ontact, at a temperature below 0 0, protected from 
light.  
 
Reagents: All reagents and solvents are free from any contaminants, especi ally pesticides, that might interfere with 
the analysis. It is often necessary to use special quality solv ents or, if this is not possible, solvents that have 
recently been re-distilled in an apparatus made entirely of glas s. In any case, suitable blank tests must be carried 
out. 
 
Apparatus: Clean the apparatus and especially glassware to ensure that they are fr ee from pesticides, for example, 
soak for at least 16 h in a solution of phosphate-free detergent, rinse  with large quantities of distilled water and 
wash with acetone  and hexane  or heptane .  CCCXVI   
2.5.1. - Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis of Pesticide Residues 
 
The analytical procedures used are validated according to the regula tions in force. In particular, they 
satisfy the following criteria: 
- the chosen method, especially the purification steps, are suitable f or the combination pesticide 
residue/substance to be analysed and not susceptible to interference f rom co-extractives; the limits of 
detection and quantification are measured for each pesticide-matrix combination to be  analysed. 
 
- between 70 per cent to 110 per cent of each pesticide is recovered. 
 
- the repeatability of the method is not less than the values indicated in Table 2.6. 
 
- the reproducibility of the method is not less than the values indicated in Table 2.7. 
 
- the concentration of test and reference solutions and the setting of t he apparatus are such that a linear 
response is obtained from the analytical detector. 
Table -2.6 
Substance Limit (mg/kg) 
Alachlor 0.02 
Aldrin and Dieldrin (sum of ) 0.05 
Azinphos-methyl 1.0 
Bromopropylate 3.0 
Chlordane (sum of cis-, trans – and Oxythlordane) 0.05 
Chlorfenvinphos 0.5 
Chlorpyrifos 0.2 
Chlorpyrifos-methyl 0.1 
Cypermethrin (and isomers) 1.0 
DDT (sum of p,p-‘DDT, o,p-‘DDT, p,p-‘DDE and p,p-‘TDE 1.0 
Deltamethrin 0.5 
Diazinon 0.5 
Dichlorvos 1.0 
Dithiocarbamates (as CS2) 2.0 
Endosulfan (sum of isomers and Endosulfan sulphate) 3.0 
Endrin 0.05 
Ethion 2.0 
Fenitrothion 0.5 
Fenvalerate 1.5 
Fonofos 0.05 
Heptachlor (sum of Heptachlor and Heptachlorepoxide) 0.05 
Hexachlorobenzene 0.1 
Hexachlorocyclohexane isomers (other than γ) 0.3 
Lindane ( γ-Hexachlorocyclohexane) 0.6 
Malathion 1.0 
Methidathion 0.2 
Parathion  0.5 
Parathion-methyl 0.2 
Permethrin 1.0 
Phosalone 0.1  CCCXVII  Piperonyl butoxide 3.0 
Pirimiphos-methyl 4.0 
Pyrethrins (sum of) 3.0 
Quintozene (sum of quintozene, pentachloroaniline and methyl 
pentachlorophenyl sulphide) 1.0 
 
Table -2.7  
 
Concentration of the 
pesticide (mg/kg) Repeatability (difference, ± 
mg/kg) Reproducibility (difference, ± 
mg/kg) 
0.010 
0.100 
1.000 0.005 
0.025 
0.125 0.01 
0.05 
0.25 
 
2.5.2. - Test for Pesticides 
 
Organochlorine, Organophosphorus and Pyrethroid Insecticides 
 
The following methods may be used, in connection with the general method a bove, depending on the 
substance being examined, it may be necessary to modify, sometimes extensively, the procedure described 
hereafter. In any case, it may be necessary to use, in addition, anot her column with a different polarity or another 
detection method (mass spectrometry) or a different method (immunoche mical methods) to confirm the results 
obtained. 
 
This procedure is valid only for the analysis of samples of veget able drugs containing less than 15 per cent 
of water. Samples with a higher content of water may be dried, prov ided it has been shown that the drying 
procedure does not affect significantly the pesticide content. 
 
1. Extraction  
 
To 10 g of the substance being examined, coarsely powdered, add 100 ml of acetone and allow to stand for 
20 min. Add 1 ml of a solution containing 1.8 µg/ml of carbophenothion in toluene..  Homogenise using a high-
speed blender for 3 min. Filter and wash the filter cake with two quantities, each of 25 ml, of acetone. Combine the 
filtrate and the washings and heat using a rotary evaporator at a  temperature not exceeding 40 0 C until the solvent 
has almost completely evaporated. To the residue add a few milliliters of  toluene and heat again until the acetone is 
completely removed. Dissolve the residue in 8 ml of toluene.  Filter through a membrane filter (45 µm), rinse the 
flask and the filter with toluene and dilute to 10.0 ml with the same solvent (solution A). 
 
 
 
 
2. Purification  
 
2.1 Organochlorine, organophosphorus and pyrethroid insecticides:  
 
Examine by size-exclusion chromatography. 
The chromatographic procedure may be carried out using: 
 
- a stainless steel column 0.30 m long and 7.8 mm in internal diameter pa cked with styre:e-divinylbenzene 
copolymer  (5 µm).  CCCXVIII   
- as mobile phase toluene  at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. 
 
Performance of the column : Inject 100 µl of a solution containing 0.5 g/l of methyl red and 0.5 g/l of oracet blue in 
toluene and proceed with the chromatography. The column is not suitable unless the colour of the eluate changes 
from orange to blue at an elution volume of about 10.3 ml. If necessary c alibrate the column, using a solution 
containing, in toluene,  at a suitable concentration, the insecticide to be analysed with t he lowest molecular mass 
(for example, dichlorvos) and that with the highest molecular mass ( for example, deltamethrin). Determine which 
fraction of the eluate contains both insecticides. 
 
Purification of the test solution : Inject a suitable volume of solution A (100 µl to 500 µl) and proceed wit h the 
chromatography. Collect the fraction as determined above (solution B). Organophosphorus insecticides are usually 
eluted between 8.8 ml and 10.9 ml. Organochlorine and pyrethroid insecticides are usually eluted between 8.5 ml 
and 10.3 ml. 
 
2.2 Organochlorine and pyrethroid insecticides: In a chromatography column, 0.10 m long and 5 mm in internal 
diameter, introduce a piece of defatted cotton and 0.5 g of silica gel  treated as follows: heat silica gel for 
chromatography in an oven at 150 0 for at least 4 h. Allow to cool and add dropwise a quantity of water  
corresponding to 1.5 per cent of the mass of silica gel used; shake v igorously until agglomerates have disappeared 
and continue shaking for 2 h using a mechanical shaker. Condition the column using 1.5 ml of hexane.  Prepacked 
columns containing about 0.50 g of a suitable silica gel may also be used provided they are pre viously validated. 
 
Concentrate solution B in a current of helium for chromatography or oxyge n-free nitrogen   almost to 
dryness and dilute to a suitable volume with toluene  (200 µl to 1 ml according to the volume injected in the 
preparation of solution B). Transfer quantitatively onto the column and proceed with the chrom atography using 1.8 
ml of toluene  as the mobile phase. Collect the eluate (solution C). 
 
2.5.3. - Quantitative Analysis 
 
A. Organophosphorus insecticides: Examine by gas chromatography, using carbophenothion as internal 
standard. It may be necessary to use a second internal standard to i dentify possible interference with the peak 
corresponding to carbophenothion. 
 
Test solution:  Concentrate solution B in a current of helium for chromatography   almost to dryness and dilute to 
100 µl with toluene. 
 
Reference solution:  Prepare at least three solutions in toluene  containing the insecticides to be determined and 
carbophenothion at concentrations suitable for plotting a calibration curve. 
 
The chromatographic procedure may be carried out using: 
 
- a fused-silica column 30 m long and 0.32 mm in internal diameter the int ernal wall of which is covered 
with a layer 0.25 µm thick of poly (dimethyl) siloxane . 
 
- hydrogen for chromatography  as the carrier gas. Other gases such as helium for chromatogra phy or 
nitrogen for chromatography may also be used provided the chromatography is suitably va lidated. 
 
 
- a phosphorus-nitrogen flame-ionisation detector or a atomic emission spectrometry  detector. 
Maintaining the temperature of the column at 80 0 for 1 min, then raising it at a rate of 30 0 /min to 150 0, 
maintaining at 150 0 for 3 min, then raising the temperature at a rate of 4 0/min to 280 0 and maintaining at this  CCCXIX  temperature for 1 min and maintaining the temperature of the inject or port at 250 0 and that of the detector at 275 0. 
Inject the chosen volume of each solution. When the chromatograms are r ecorded in the prescribed conditions, the 
relative retention times are approximately those listed in Tabl e 2.8 Calculate the content of each insecticide from 
the peak areas and the concentrations of the solutions. 
 
B. Organochlorine and Pyrethroid Insecticides: Examine by gas chromatography, using carbophenothion as the 
internal standard. It may be necessary to use a second internal s tandard to identify possible interference with the 
peak corresponding to carbophenothion . 
 
Test solution:  Concentrate solution C in a current of helium for chromatography or oxyge n-free nitrogen  almost 
to dryness and dilute to 500 µl with toluene. 
 
Reference solution:  Prepare at least three solutions in toluene containing the insecticides to be determined and 
carbophenothion  at concentrations suitable for plotting a calibration curve. 
 
Table 2.8- Relative Retention Times of Pesticides 
 
Substance Relative retention times 
Dichlorvos 0.20 
Fonofos 0.50 
Diazinon 0.52 
Parathion-methyl 0.59 
Chlorpyrifos-methyl 0.60 
Pirimiphos-methyl 0.66 
Malathion 0.67 
Parathion 0.69 
Chlorpyrifos 0.70 
Methidathion 0.78 
Ethion 0.96 
Carbophenothion 1.00 
Azinphos-methyl 1.17 
Phosalon 1.18 
The chromatographic procedure may be carried out using: 
 
- a fused silica column 30 m long and 0.32 mm in internal diameter the int ernal wall of which is covered 
with a layer 0.25 µm thick of poly (dimethyl diphenyl) siloxane. 
- hydrogen for chromatography  as the carrier gas. Other gases such as helium for chromatogra phy or 
nitrogen for chromatography may also be used, provided the chromatography is suitably va lidated. 
- an electron-capture detector. 
- a device allowing direct cold on-column injection. 
maintaining the temperature of the column at 80 0 for 1 min, then raising it at a rate of 30 0/min to 150 0, maintaining 
at 150 0 for 3 min, then raising the temperature at a rate of 4 0/min to 280 0 and maintaining at this temperature for 1 
min and maintaining the temperature of the injector port at 250 0 and that of the detector at 275 0. Inject the chosen 
volume of each solution. When the chromatograms are recorded in the pres cribed conditions, the relative retention 
times are approximately those listed in Table 2.9. Calculate the conte nt of each insecticide from the peak areas and 
the concentrations of the solutions. 
Table 2.9- Relative Retention Times of Insecticides 
 
Substance Relative retention times 
α-Hexachlorocyclohexane 0.44 
Hexachlorobenzene 0.45  CCCXX β-Hexachlorocyclohexane 0.49 
Lindane 0.49 
δ-Hexachlorocyclohexane 0.54 
ε-Hexachlorocyclohexane 0.56 
Heptachlor 0.61 
Aldrin 0.68 
cis -Heptachlor-epoxide 0.76 
o,p -‘DDE 0.81 
α-Endosulfan 0.82 
Dieldrin 0.87 
p,p -‘DDE 0.87 
o,p -‘DDD 0.89 
Endrin 0.91 
β-Endosulfan 0.92 
o,p -‘DDT 0.95 
Carbophenothion 1.00 
p,p -‘DDT 1.02 
cis -Permethrin 1.29 
trans -Permethrin 1.31 
Cypermethrin* 1.40 
Fenvalerate* 1.47 and 1.49 
Deltamethrin 1.54 
 
*The substance shows several peaks. 
 
2.6. - GAS CHROMATOGRAPHY   
 
Gas chromatography (GC) is a chromatographic separation technique bas ed on the difference in the 
distribution of species between two non-miscible phases in which the mobile  phase is a carrier gas moving through 
or passing the stationary phase contained in a column. It is applicable  to substances or their derivatives, which are 
volatilized under the temperatures employed. 
 
GC is based on mechanisms of adsorption, mass distribution or size exclusion. 
 
Apparatus 
 
The apparatus consists of an injector, a chromatographic column contained in an oven, a detector and a 
data acquisition system (or an integrator or a chart recorder). T he carrier gas flows through the column at a 
controlled rate or pressure and then through the detector. 
 
The chromatography is carried out either at a constant temperature  or according to a given temperature 
programme. 
 
Injectors 
Direct injections  of solutions are the usual mode of injection, unless otherwise prescribe d in the 
monograph. Injection may be carried out either directly at the head of  the column using a syringe or an injection 
valve, or into a vaporization chamber which may be equipped with a stream splitter. 
 
Injections of vapour phase  may be effected by static or dynamic head-space injection systems. 
  CCCXXI  Dynamic head-space  (purge and trap) injection systems include a sparging device by whi ch volatile 
substances in solution are swept into an absorbent column maintained at a  low temperature. Retained substances 
are then desorbed into the mobile phase by rapid heating of the absorbent column. 
 
Static head-space  injection systems include a thermostatically controlled sample he ating chamber in which 
closed vials containing solid or liquid samples are placed for a fi xed period of time to allow the volatile 
components of the sample to reach equilibrium between the non-gaseous phas e and the vapour phase. After 
equilibrium has been established, a predetermined amount of the head-spac e of the vial is flushed into the gas 
chromatograph. 
 
Stationary Phases 
 
Stationary phases are contained in columns, which may be: 
 
- a capillary column of fused-silica close wall is coated with the stationary pha se. 
- a column packed with inert particles impregnated with the stationary phase. 
- a column packed with solid stationary phase.  
 
Capillary columns are 0.1 mm to 0.53 mm in internal diameter ( Ф) and 5 to 6 m in length.  The liquid or 
stationary phase, which may be chemically bonded to the inner surface, is a film 0.1 µm to 5.0 µ m thick. 
 
Packed columns, made of glass or metal, are usually 1 m to 3 m in length with an internal diameter ( Ф) of 
2 mm to 4 mm. Stationary phases usually consist of porous polymers or s olid supports impregnated with liquid 
phase. 
 
Supports for analysis of polar compounds on columns packed with low-capacity , low-polarity stationary 
phase must be inert to avoid peak tailing. The reactivity of support  materials can be reduced by silanising prior to 
coating with liquid phase. Acid-washed, flux-calcinated diatomaceous ea rth is often used. Materials are available in 
various particle sizes, the most commonly used particles are in the ranges of 150 µm to 180 µm and 125 µm to 150 
µm.   
 
Mobile Phases 
 
Retention time and peak efficiency depend on the carrier gas flow rate; retention time is directly 
proportional to column length and resolution is proportional to the square root of the column length. For packed 
columns, the carrier gas flow rate is usually expressed in mill iliters per minute at atmospheric pressure and room 
temperature, flow rate is measured at the detector outlet, eithe r with a calibrated mechanical device or with a 
bubble tube, while the column is at operating temperature. The linear v elocity of the carrier gas through a packed 
column is inversely proportional to the square root of the internal diam eter of the column for a given flow volume. 
Flow rates of 60 ml/min in a 4 mm internal diameter column and 15 ml /min in a 2 mm internal diameter column, 
give identical linear velocities and thus similar retention times. 
 
Helium or nitrogen is usually employed as the carrier gas for pa cked columns, whereas commonly used 
carrier gases for capillary columns are nitrogen, helium and hydrogen. 
Detectors 
 
Flame-ionisation detectors are usually employed but additional detect ors which may be used include: 
electron-capture, nitrogen-phosphorus, mass spectrometric, thermal conducti vity, Fourier transform infrared 
spectrophotometric and others, depending on the purpose of the analysis. 
 
  CCCXXII  Method 
 
Equilibrate the column, the injector and the detector at the temperat ures and the gas flow rates specified in 
the monograph until a stable baseline is achieved. Prepare the test  solution (s) and the reference solutions (s) as 
prescribed. The solutions must be free from solid particles. 
 
Criteria for assessing the suitability of the system are de scribed in the chapter on Chromatographic 
separation techniques.  The extent to which adjustments of parameters of the chromatographic  system can be made 
to satisfy the criteria of system suitability are also given in this chapt er. 
2.7. - TEST FOR AFLATOXINS  
 
Caution:  Aflatoxins are highly dangerous and extreme care should be exercised in handling aflatoxi n materials. 
 
This test is provided to detect the possible presence of aflatoxins B 1, B 2, G 1 and G 2 in any material of plant 
origin. Unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph, use the following method. 
 
Zinc Acetate – Aluminum Chloride Reagent:  Dissolve 20 g of zinc acetate  and 5 g of aluminum chloride  in 
sufficient water to make 100 ml. 
 
Sodium Chloride Solution:  Dissolve 5 g of sodium chloride  in 50 ml of purified water. 
 
Test Solution 1: Grind about 200 g of plant material to a fine powder. Transfer about 50 g of the powdered 
material, accurately weighed, to a glass-stoppered flask. Add 200 m l of a mixture of methanol  and water  (17: 3). 
Shake vigorously by mechanical means for not less than 30 minutes and filter. [Note – If the solution has 
interfering plant pigments, proceed as directed for Test Solution 2 .] Discard the first 50 ml of the filtrate and collect 
the next 40 ml portion. Transfer the filtrate to a separatory funnel. Add 40 ml of sodium  chloride solution and 25 
ml of hexane  and shake for 1 minute. Allow the layers to separate and transfer  the lower aqueous layer to a second 
separatory funnel. Extract the aqueous layer in the separatory funnel twice, each time with 25 ml of methylene 
chloride , by shaking for 1 minute. Allow the layers to separate each time , separate the lower organic layer and 
collect the combined organic layers in a 125 ml conical flask. Eva porate the organic solvent to dryness on a water 
bath. Cool the residue. If interferences exist in the residue, proceed as directed for Cleanup Procedure;  otherwise, 
dissolve the residue obtained above in 0.2 ml of a mixture of chloroform  and acetonitrile  (9.8 : 0.2) and shake by 
mechanical means if necessary. 
 
Test Solution 2: Collect 100 ml of the filtrate from the start of the flow and transfer to a 250 ml beaker. Add 20 ml 
of Zinc Acetate-Aluminum Chloride Reagent and 80 ml of water. Stir and allow to stand for 5 minutes. Add 5 g of a 
suitable filtering aid, such as diatomaceous earth, mix and filter . Discard the first 50 ml of the filtrate, and collect 
the next 80 ml portion. Proceed as directed for Test Solution 1,  beginning with “Transfer the filtrate to a separatory 
funnel.” 
 
Cleanup Procedure:  Place a medium-porosity sintered-glass disk or a glass wool plug  at the bottom of a 10 mm x 
300 mm chromatographic tube. Prepare slurry of 2 g of silica gel wi th a mixture of ethyl ether  and hexane  (3: 1), 
pour the slurry into the column and wash with 5 ml of the same solvent mixture. Allow the absorbent to settle and 
add to the top of the column a layer of 1.5 g of anhydrous sodium sulfate . Dissolve the residue obtained above in 3 
ml of methylene chloride  and transfer it to the column. Rinse the flask twice with 1 ml portions of methylene 
chloride , transfer the rinses to the column and elute at a rate not great er than 1 ml per minute. Add successively to 
the column 3 ml of hexane , 3 ml of diethyl ether  and 3 ml of methylene chloride ; elute at a rate not greater than 3 
ml per minute; and discard the eluates. Add to the column 6 mL of a mi xture of methylene chloride  and acetone  (9 
: 1) and elute at a rate not greater than 1 ml per minute, preferabl y without the aid of vacuum. Collect this eluate in 
a small vial, add a boiling chip if necessary and evaporate to drynes s on a water bath. Dissolve the residue in 0.2 ml 
of a mixture of chloroform  and acetonitrile  (9.8 : 0.2) and shake by mechanical means if necessary.  CCCXXIII   
Aflatoxin Solution: Dissolve accurately weighed quantities of aflatoxin B 1, aflatoxin B 2, aflatoxin G 1 and aflatoxin 
G2 in a mixture of chloroform  and acetonitrile  (9.8: 0.2) to obtain a solution having concentrations of 0.5 µg /per 
ml each for aflatoxin B 1 and G 1 and 0.1 µg per ml each for aflatoxins for B2  and G 2.  
 
Procedure: Separately apply 2.5 µl, 5 µl, 7.5 µl and 10 µl of the Aflatoxin Solution and three 10 µl applicat ions of 
either Test Solution 1 or Test Solution 2 to a suitable thin-layer chromatographic plate coated with a 0.25-mm layer 
of chromatographic silica gel mixture. Superimpose 5 µl of the Aflatoxin  Solution on one of the three 10 µl 
applications of the Test Solution.  Allow the spots to dry and develop the chromatogram in an unsaturated c hamber 
containing a solvent system consisting of a mixture of chloroform , acetone  and isopropyl alcohol  (85:10:5) until 
the solvent front has moved not less than 15 cm from the origin. Remove  the plate from the developing chamber, 
mark the solvent front and allow the plate to air-dry. Locate the spots on the plate by examination under UV light 
at 365 nm: the four applications of the Aflatoxin Solution appear as four clearly separated blue fluorescent spots; 
the spot obtained from the Test Solution that was superimposed on the Aflatoxin Solution is no more intense than 
that of the corresponding Aflatoxin Solution;  and no spot from any of the other Test Solutions corresponds to any of 
the spots obtained from the applications of the  Aflatoxin Solution. If any spot of aflatoxins is obtained in the Test 
Solution, match the position of each fluorescent spot of the Test Solution with those of the Aflatoxin Solution to 
identify the type of aflatoxin present. The intensity of the aflatoxi n spot, if present in the Test Solution, when 
compared with that of the corresponding aflatoxin in the Aflatoxin Solution will give an approximate concentration 
of aflatoxin in the Test Solution.           
 
Permissible Limit of Aflatoxins* 
 
S.No           Aflatoxins                                    Permissible Limit  
 
 
1.                  B1                                                      0.5 ppm 
2.         G 1            0.5 ppm         
3.                 B 2                                                 0.1 ppm  
4.         G 2.                                                      0.1 ppm 
*For Domestic use only  CCCXXIV  APPENDIX - 3  
 
3.1. PHYSICAL TESTS AND DETERMINATIONS 
 
3.1.1. - REFRACTIVE INDEX  
 
 The refractive index ( η) of a substance with reference to air is the ratio of the sine of the ang le of incidence 
to the sine of the angle of refraction of a beam of light passing from air into the substance. It varies with the 
wavelength of the light used in its measurement. 
 
 Unless otherwise prescribed, the refractive index is measured a t 25 0 (±0.5) with reference to the 
wavelength of the D line of sodium ( λ 589.3 nm). The temperature should be carefully adjusted and maintained 
since the refractive index varies significantly with temperature. 
 
The Abbe’s refractometer is convenient for most measurements of refractive index but other refractometer 
of equal or greater accuracy may be used. Commercial refractom eters are normally constructed for use with white 
light but are calibrated to give the refractive index in terms of the D line of sodi um light. 
 
To achieve accuracy, the apparatus should be calibrated against distilled water which has a refractive index 
of 1.3325 at 25 0 or against the reference liquids given in the Table 3.1. 
 
Table 3.1 
_______________________________________________________________________  
 
Reference        η D 20º              Temperature  
Liquid                                               Co-efficient    
                                            ∆n/ ∆t 
 
Carbon tetrachloride     1.4603   -0.00057 
Toluene      1.4969   -0.00056 
α-Methylnaphthalene     1.6176   -0.00048 
________________________________________________________________________ 
* Reference index value for the D line of sodium, measured at 20 0 
 
The cleanliness of the instrument should be checked frequently by deter mining the refractive index of 
distilled water, which at 25 0 is 1.3325. 
 
3.1.2. - WEIGHT PER MILLILITRE AND SPECIFIC GRAVITY  
 
    A. Weight per millilitre:  The weight per millilitre of a liquid is the weight in g of 1 ml of a liquid when 
weighed in air at 25 0, unless otherwise specified.  
 
Method 
 
  Select a thoroughly clean and dry pycnometer. Calibrate the pycnomete r by filling it with recently boiled 
and cooled water at 25 0 and weighing the contents. Assuming that the weight of 1 ml of water at 25 0 when weighed 
in air of density 0.0012 g per ml, is 0.99602 g. Calculate the capacity of the pycnometer. (Ordinary deviations in 
the density of air from the value given do not affect the result of a determination significantly). Adjust the  CCCXXV temperature of the substance to be examined, to about 20 0 and fill the pycnometer with it. Adjust the temperature of 
the filled pycnometer to 25 0, remove any excess of the substance and weigh. Substract the tare weight of the 
pycnometer from the filled weight of the pycnometer. Determine the  weight per milliliter dividing the weight in air, 
expressed in g, of the quantity of liquid which fills the pycnometer at  the specified temperature, by the capacity 
expressed in ml, of the pycnometer at the same temperature. 
 
B. Specific gravity: The specific gravity of a liquid is the weight of a given volum e of the liquid at 25 0 (unless 
otherwise specified) compared with the weight of an equal volume of water at the same 
temperature, all weighing being taken in air .  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Method   
 
Proceed as described under wt. per ml. Obtain the specific gravity  of the liquid by dividing the weight of 
the liquid contained in the pycnometer by the weight of water contained, both determined at 25 0 unless otherwise 
directed in the individual monograph.   
 
3.1.3. - DETERMINATION OF pH VALUES  
 
The pH value of an aqueous liquid may be defined as the common logarithum of t he reciprocal of the 
hydrogen ion concentration expressed in g per litre. Although this definiti on provides a useful practical means for 
the quantitative indication of the acidity or alkalinity of a solut ion, it is less satisfactory from a strictly theoretical 
point of view. No definition of pH as a measurable quantity can have a  simple meaning, which is also fundamental 
and exact. 
 
The pH value of a liquid can be determined potentiometrically by mea ns of the glass electrode, a reference 
electrode and a pH meter either of the digital or analogue type.  
 
3.2. - DETERMINATION OF MELTING RANGE AND CONGEALING RANGE  
 
3.2.1. Determination of Melting Range 
 
The melting-range of a substance is the range between the correc ted temperature at which the substance 
begins to form droplets and the corrected temperature at which it c ompletely melts, as shown by formation of a 
meniscus. 
 
Apparatus 
 
(a) A capillary tube of soft glass, closed at one end, and having the following dimensions : 
 
(i) thickness of the wall, about 0.10 to 0.15 mm. 
(ii) length about 10 cm or any length suitable for apparatus used. 
(iii)  internal diameter 0.9 to 1.1 mm for substances melting below 1000  or 0.8  to 1.2 mm for 
substances melting above 100 0. 
 
Thermometers  
 
Accurately standardized thermometers covering the range 10 0 to 300 0 the length of two degrees on the scale 
being not less than 0.8 mm. These thermometers are of the mercury-i n-glass, solid-stem type; the bulb is  CCCXXVI  cylindrical in shape, and made of approved thermometric glass suitabl e for the range of temperature covered; each 
thermometer is fitted with a safety chamber. The smallest di vision on the thermometer scale should vary between 
0.1 0 to 1.5 0 according to the melting point of the substance under test. 
 
The following form of heating apparatus is recommended. 
 
A glass heating vessel of suitable, construction and capacity fit ted with suitable stiring device, capable of 
rapidly mixing the liquids. 
 Suitable liquids for use in the heating vessel: 
 
 Glycerin    Upto 150 0 
 
 Sulphuric acid to which a small crystal of potassium nitrate  or 4 
 Drops of nitric acid  per 100 ml has been added   Upto 200 0 
 
 A liquid paraffin of sufficiently high boiling range   Upto 250 0 
 
 Seasame oil   Upto 300 0 
 
 30 parts of potassium sulphate , dissolved by heating in 70 
 parts of sulphuric acid    Upto 300 0 
 
 Any other apparatus or method, preferably, the electric method may be used subj ect to a check by means of 
pure substances having melting temperature covering the ranges from 0 0 to 300 0 and with suitable intervals. 
 
 The following substances are suitable for this purpose. 
 Substance Melting range 
 Vanillin 81 0 to 83 0 
 Acetanilide 114 0 to 116 0 
 Phenacetin 134 0 to 136 0 
 Sulphanilamide 164 0 to 166.5 0 
 Sulphapyridine 191 0 to 193 0 
 Caffeine (Dried at 100 0) 234 0 to 237 0 
 
Procedure  
 
Method I : Transfer a suitable quantity of the powdered and thoroughly dried substa nce to a dry capillary tube and 
pack the powder by tapping the tube on a hard surface so as to form a t ightly packed column of 2 to 4 mm in 
height. Attach the capillary tube and its contents to a standardized thermometer so that the closed end is at the level 
of the middle of the bulb; heat in a suitable apparatus (preferably a  round-bottom flask) fitted with an auxiliary 
thermometer regulating the rise of temperature in the beginning t o 3 0 per minute. When the temperature reached is 
below the lowest figure of the range for the substance under examinat ion, the heating of the apparatus is adjusted 
as desired; if no other directions are given, the rate of rise of temperature  should be kept at 1 0 to 2 0 per minute. The 
statement ‘determined by rapid heating’ means that the rate of rise of tempera ture is 5 0 per minute during the entire 
period of heating. 
 
Unless otherwise directed, the temperature at which the substance forms droplets against the side of the 
tube and the one at which it is completely melted as indicated by the formation of a defini te meniscus, are read. 
 
The following emergent stem corrections should be applied to the temperature reading s. 
   CCCXXVII  Before starting the determination of the melting temperature the  auxiliary thermometer is attached so that 
the bulb touches the standard thermometer at a point midway between the  graduation for the expected melting 
temperature and the surface of the heating material. When the subst ance has melted, the temperature is read on the 
auxiliary thermometer. The correction figure to be added to the tempe rature reading of the standardized 
thermometer is calculated from the following formula 
 
0.00015 N (T—t) 
 
Where ‘T’ is the temperature reading of the standardized thermometer. 
 
‘t’ is the temperature reading of the auxiliary thermometer. 
 
‘N’ is the number of degrees of the scale of the standardized ther mometer between the surface of the heating 
material and level of mercury. 
 
The statement “melting range, a 0 to b 0” means that the corrected temperature at which the material forms droplets 
must be at least a 0, and that the material must be completely melted at the corrected temperature , b 0. 
 
Method II: The apparatus employed for this test is the same as described for  method I except for such details as 
are mentioned in the procedure given below 
 
Procedure:  A capillary tube open at both ends is used for this test. Melt the material under test at as low a 
temperature as possible. Draw into the capillary a column of the mate rial about 10 mm high. Cool the charged tube 
in contact with ice for at least 2 hours. Attach the tube to the ther mometer by means of rubber band and adjust it in 
the heating vessel containing water so that the upper edge of the m aterial is 10 mm below the water level. Heat in 
the manner as prescribed in Method I until the temperature is about 50 below the expected melting point and then 
regulate the rate of rise of temperature to between 0.5 0 to 1 0 per minute. The temperature at which the material is 
observed to rise in the capillary tube is the melting temperature of the substance . 
 
3.2.2. - Determination of Congealing Range   
 
The congealing temperature is that point at which there exists a mixture of the liquid (fused) phase of a 
substance and a small but increasing proportion of the solid phase.  It i s distinct from the freezing point which is 
the temperature at which the liquid and solid phase of a substance are  in equilibrium.  In certain cases, this may 
happen over a range of temperatures. 
 
The temperature at which a substance solidifies upon cooling is a useful index of its puri ty if heat is liberated when 
solidification takes place. 
 
The following method is applicable to substances that melt between – 20 0 and 150 0. 
 
Apparatus  
 
A test-tube (About 150 mm × 25 mm) placed inside another test-tube (about  160 mm × 40 mm) the inner tube is 
closed by a stopper that carries a stirrer and a thermometer ( About 175 mm long and with 0.2 0 graduations) fixed 
so that the bulb is about 15 mm above the bottom of the tube.  The stirrer is made from a glass  rod or other suitable 
material formed at one end into a loop of about 18 mm overall diameter  at right angles to the rod.  The inner tube 
with its jacket is supported centrally in a 1-litre baker cont aining a suitable cooling liquid to within 20 mm of the 
top.  The thermometer is supported in the cooling bath. 
 
  CCCXXVIII   
 
Method  
 
Melt the substance, if a solid, at a temperature not more than 20 0 above its expected congealing point, and pour it 
into the inner test-tube to a height of 50 to 57 mm.  Assemble the appar atus with the bulb of the thermometer 
immersed half-way between the top and bottom of the sample in the te st-tube.  Fill the bath to almost 20 mm from 
the top of the tube with a suitable fluid at a temperature 4 0 to 5 0 below the expected congealing point.  If the 
substance is a liquid at room temperature, carry out the determination using a bath te mperature about 15 0 below the 
expected congealing point.  When the sample has cooled to about 5 0 above its expected congealing point stir it 
continuously by moving the loop up and down between the top and bottom of the sample  at a regular rate of 20 
complete cycles per minute.  If necessary, congelation may be induced by s cratching the inner walls of the test-tube 
with the thermometer or by introducing a small amount of the previousl y congealed substance under examination.  
Pronounced supercooling may result in deviation from the normal pattern of  temperature changes.  If it happens, 
repeat the test introducing small fragments of the solid substance  under examination at 1 0 intervals when the 
temperature approaches the expected congealing point. 
 
Record the reading of the thermometer every 30 seconds and continue sti rring only so long as the temperature is 
falling.  Stop the stirring when the temperature is constant to st arts to rise slightly.  Continue recording the 
temperature for at least 3 minutes after the temperature again begins to fal l after remaining constant. 
 
The congealing point will be mean of not less than four consecutive readings that lie wi thin a range of 0.2 0. 
 
3.2.3. - DETERMINATION OF BOILING RANGE  
 
The boiling-range of a substance is the range of temperature withi n which the whole or a specified portion 
of the substance distils. 
 
Apparatus 
 
 The boiling-range is determined in a suitable apparatus, the salient features of  which are described below: 
 
(a) Distillation flask: The flask shall be made of colourless transparent heat-resistant  glass and well annealed. It 
should have a spherical bulb having a capacity of about 130 ml. The side tube sl opes downwards in the same plane 
as the axis of the neck at angle of between 72 0 to 78 0. Other important dimensional details are as under: 
 
  Internal diameter of neck  15 to 17 mm 
  
  Distance from top of neck to center of side tube  72 to 78 mm 
 
  Distance from the center of the side tube to surface  
  of the Liquid when the flask contains 100 ml liquid        87 to 93 mm 
 
  Internal diameter of side tube  3.5 to 4.5 mm 
 
  Length of side tube  97 to 103 mm 
 
(b) Thermometer : Standardised thermometers calibrated for 100 mm immersion and suit able for the purpose and 
covering the boiling range of the substance under examination shall be e mployed; the smallest division on the 
thermometer scale may vary between 0.2 0 to 1 0 according to requirement. 
  CCCXXIX  (c)  Draught Screen : suitable draught screen, rectangular in cross section with a har d asbestos board about 6 mm 
thick closely fitting horizontally to the sides of the screen, shoul d be used. The asbestos board shall have a centrally 
cut circular hole, 110 mm in diameter. The asbestos board is meant for ensuring that hot gas es from the heat source 
do not come in contact with the sides or neck of the flask. 
 
(d) Asbestos Board:  A 150 mm square asbestos board 6 mm thick provided with a circular hol e located centrally 
to hold the bottom of the flask, shall be used. For distillation of liquids  boiling below 60 0 the hole shall be 30 mm 
in diameter; for other liquid it should be 50 mm in diameter. This boar d is to be placed on the hard asbestos board 
of the draught screen covering its 110 mm hole. 
 
(e)  Condenser: A straight water-cooled glass condenser about 50 cm long shall be used. 
 
Procedure: 100 ml of the liquid to be examined is placed in the distillation flask , and a few glass beads or other 
suitable substance is added. The bulb of the flask is placed centrall y over a circular hole varying from 3 to 5 cm in 
diameter (according to the boiling range of the substance under examina tion), in a suitable asbestos board. The 
thermometer is held concentrically in the neck of the flask by means of a well fi tting cork in such a manner that the 
bulb of the thermometer remains just below the level of the opening of  the side-tube. Heat the flask slowly in the 
beginning and when distillation starts, adjust heating in such a manner that the liquid distils at a constant rate of 4 
to 5 ml per minute. The temperature is read when the first drop runs from the condenser, and again when the last 
quantity of liquid in the flask is evaporated. 
 
The boiling ranges indicated, apply at a barometric pressure of 760 mm  of mercury. If the determination is 
made at some other barometric pressure, the following correction is added to the tempe ratures read: 
 
K- (760—p) 
 
Where p is the barometric pressure (in mm) read on a mercury bar ometer, without taking into account the 
temperature of the air; 
 
K is the boiling temperature constant for different liquids having di fferent boiling ranges as indicated 
below:— 
 
 Observed Boiling range ‘K’ 
 
 Below 100 0 0.04 
 100 0 to 140 0 0.045 
 141 0 to 190 0 0.05 
 191 0 to 240 0 0.055 
 above 240 0 0.06 
 
If the barometric pressure is below 760 mm of mercury the correct ion is added to the observed boiling-
range; if above, the correction is subtracted. 
The statement ‘distils between a 0 and b 0, , means that temperature at which the first drop runs from the 
condenser is not less than a 0 and that the temperature at which the liquid is completely evaporat ed is not greater 
than b 0. 
 
Micro-methods of equal accuracy may be used. 
 
 
  CCCXXX 3.3. - DETERMINATION OF OPTICAL ROTATION AND SPECIFIC OPTI CAL ROTATION 
 
A. Optical Rotation : Certain substances, in a pure state, in solution and in tinctures posses the property of rotating 
the plane of polarized light, i.e., the incident light emerges in a pl ane forming an angle with the plane of the 
incident light. These substances are said to be optically active and the property of rotating the plane of polarized 
light is known as optical rotation. The optical rotation is defined as  the angle through which the plane of polarized 
light is rotated when polarized light obtained from sodium or mercury vapour lamp passes through one decimeter 
thick layer of a liquid or a solution of a substance at a temperat ure of 25º unless as otherwise stated in the 
monograph. Substances are described as dextrorotatory or laevoretatory according to the clockwise or 
anticlockwise rotation respectively of the plane of polarized lig ht. Dextrorotation is designated by a plus (+) sign 
and laevorotation by a minus (-) sign before the number indicating the degrees of rotati on. 
 
Apparatus: A polarimeter on which angular rotation accurate 0.05 0 can be read may be used. 
 
Calibration: The apparatus may be checked by using a solution of previously dried sucrose  and measuring the 
optical rotation in a 2-din tube at 25 0 and using the concentrations indicated in Table.  
 
 Concentration  Angle of Rotation (+) 
 (g/100 ml)  at 25 0 
 
  10.0   13.33 
 20.0   26.61  
 30.0   39.86 
 40.0   53.06 
 50.0   66.23  
 
Procedure : For liquid substances, take a minimum of five readings of the rot ation of the liquid and also for an 
empty tube at the specified temperature. For a solid dissolve in a  suitable solvent and take five readings of the 
rotation of the solution and the solvent used. Calculate the average of each set of five readings and find out the 
corrected optical rotation from the observed rotation and the reading with the blank (av erage). 
 
B. Specific Rotation  : The apparatus and the procedure for this determination are the same  as those specified 
for optical rotation. 
 
  Specific rotation is denoted by the expression 
          t 
   [ α]— 
          x 
 
‘t’ denotes the temperature of rotation; ‘ α’ denotes the wave length of light used or the characteristic spe ctral line. 
Specific rotations are expressed in terms of sodium light of wave  length 589.3 mw (D line) and at a temperature of 
25 0, unless otherwise specified. 
 
Specific rotation of a substance may be calculated from the following formulae:  
For liquid substances 
 
    
                                                           a  
  [ α]t= ------ 
            ld  CCCXXXI   For solutions of substances 
 
                         a x 100  
 [ α]t =     ------------- 
                     lc. 
  Where a is the corrected observed rotation in degrees 
  1 is the length of the polarimeter tube in decimeters. 
 
D is the specific gravity of the liquid C is the   concentration of solution expre ssed 
as the number of g of the substance in 100 ml of solution. 
 
3.4. - DETERMINATION OF VISCOSITY  
 Viscosity is a property of a liquid, which is closely related to the resistance  to flow. 
 
 In C.G.S. system, the dynamic viscosity (n) of a liquid is the ta ngential force in dryness per square 
centimeter exerted in either of the two parallel planes placed, 1  cm apart when the space between them is filled 
with the fluid and one of the plane is moving in its own plane with a v elocity of 1 cm per second relatively to the 
other. The unit of dynamic viscosity is the poise (abbreviated p). The centi pois e (abbreviated cp) is 1/100 th  of one 
poise. 
 
 While on the absolute scale, viscosity is measured in poise or ce nti poise, it is mot convenient to use the 
kinematic scale in which the units are stokes (abbreviated S) and centi-stokes (abbreviated CS). The centistokes is 
1/100 th  of one stoke. The kinematic viscosity of a liquid is equal to the quotient of the dynamic viscosity and the 
density of the liquid at the same temperature, thus : 
 
           Dynamic Viscosity 
 Kinematic Viscosity =     ------------------------- 
                  Density 
 
 Viscosity of liquid may be determined by any method that will mea sure the resistance to shear offered by 
the liquid. 
 
 Absolute viscosity can be measured directly if accurate dimens ions of the measuring instruments are 
known but it is more common practice to calibrate the instrument wit h a liquid of known viscosity and to determine 
the viscosity of the unknown fluid by comparison with that of the known. 
 
Procedure : The liquid under test is filled in a U tube viscometer in accor dance with the expected viscosity of the 
liquid so that the fluid level stands within 0.2 mm of the filling ma rk of the viscometer when the capillary is 
vertical and the specified temperature is attained by the test  liquid. The liquid is sucked or blown to the specified 
weight of the viscometer and the time taken for the meniscus to pass the two specified marks is measured. The 
kinematic viscosity in centistokes is calculated from the following equati on: 
 
 Kinematic viscosity = kt 
 
 Where k = the constant of the viscometer tube determined by observ ation on liquids of known kinematic 
viscosity; t = time in seconds for meniscus to pass through the two specified marks . 
 
 
  CCCXXXII   
3.5. - DETERMINATION OF TOTAL SOLIDS  
 
Determination of total solids in Asava/ Aristha is generally required. Asava/ Aristha containing sugar or 
honey should be examined by method 1, sugar or honey free Asava/ Aristha and other material should be examined 
by method 2. 
 
Method 1 : Transfer accurately 50 ml of the clear Asava/ Aristha an evaporable dish and evaporate to a thick 
extract on a water bath. Unless specified otherwise, extract the residue with 4 quantities, each of 10 ml, of 
dehydrated ethanol with stirring and filter. Combine the filtrates to another evapor ating dish which have been dried 
to a constant weight and evaporate nearly to dryness on a water bat h, add accurately 1 g of diatomite (dry at 105 0 
for 3 hours and cooled in a desiccator for 30 min), stir thoroughly, dry at 105 0 for 3 hours, cool the dish in a 
desiccator for 30 min, and weigh immediately. Deduct the weight of di atomite added, the weight of residue should 
comply with the requirements stated under the individual monograph.  
 
Method 2 : Transfer accurately 50 ml of the clear Asava/ Aristha to an evaporable dish, which has been dried to a 
constant weight and evaporate to dryness on a water bath, then dry at 105 0 for 3 hours. After cooling the dish 
containing the residue in a desiccator for 30 min, weigh it immediat ely. The weight of residue should comply with 
the requirements stated under the individual monograph. 
 
3.6. - SOLUBILITY IN WATER  
 
Take 100 ml of distil water in a Nessler cylinder  and add air-dried and coarsely powdered drug up to 
saturation. Then stir the sample continuously by twirling the spatula (rounded end of a microspatula) rapidly. After 
1 minute, filter the solution using Hirsch funnel, evaporate the filtr ate to dryness in a tared flat bottomed shallow 
dish and dry at 105 0 to constant weight and calculate the solubility of the drug in water (wt. in mg/100ml).  
 
3.7. - DETERMINATION OF SAPONIFICATION VALUE 
 
The saponification value is the number of mg of potassium hydroxide required to neutralize  the fatty acids, 
resulting from the complete hydrolysis of 1 g of the oil or fat, when determined by the foll owing method: 
 
Dissolve 35 to 40 g of potassium hydroxide in 20 ml water, and add sufficie nt alcohol to make 1,000 ml. 
Allow it to stand overnight, and pour off the clear liquor. 
 
Weigh accurately about 2 g of the substance in a tared 250 ml flask , add 25 ml of the alcoholic solution of 
potassium hydroxide, attach a reflux condenser and boil on a water-bath for one hour, frequently rotating the 
contents of the flask cool and add 1 ml of solution of phenolphthalein and titr ate the excess of alkali with 0.5 N 
hydrochloric acid. Note the number of ml required (a). Repeat the experi ment with the same quantities of the same 
reagents in the manner omitting the substance. Note the number of ml required (b) Calculate the saponification 
value from the following formula:— 
 
            (b–a) × 0.02805 × 1.000 
 Saponification Value   = ------------------------------------  
                  W 
 
 Where ‘W’ is the weight in g of the substance taken. 
 
 
 
  CCCXXXIII  3.8. - DETERMINATION OF IODINE VALUE  
 
The Iodine value of a substance is the weight of iodine absorbed by 100 par t by weight of the substance, 
when determined by one of the following methods:- 
  
Iodine Flasks - The Iodine flasks have a nominal capacity of 250 ml. 
 
A. Iodine Monochloride Method - Place the substance accurately weighed, in dry iodine flask, add 10 m l of 
carbon tetrachloride , and dissolve. Add 20 ml of iodine monochloride solution, insert the stopper, prev iously 
moistened with solution of potassium iodine and allow to stand in a dark pl ace at a temperature of about 17 0 or 
thirty minutes. Add 15 ml of solution of potassium iodine and 100 ml water; shake, and titrate with 0.1 N sodium 
thiosulphate, using solution of starch as indicator. Note the number of ml required (a). At the same time carry out 
the operation in exactly the same manner, but without the substance being  tested, and note the number of ml of 0.1 
N sodium thiosulphate required (b). 
 
 Calculate the iodine value from the formula:- 
 
         (b–a) × 0.01269 × 100 
 Iodine value = ------------------------------------- 
 
               W 
 Where ‘W’ is the weight in g of the substance taken. 
 
The approximate weight, in g, of the substance to be taken may be calculated by  dividing 20 by the highest 
expected iodine value. If more than half the available halogen is abs orbed, the test must be repeated, a smaller 
quantity of the substance being used. 
 
Iodine Monochloride Solution: The solution may be prepared by either of the two following methods:  
 
(1) Dissolve 13 g of iodine in a mixture of 300 ml of carbon tetrachloride and 700 ml of glac ial acetic acid. To 
20 ml of this solution, add 15 ml of solution of potassium iodide and 100 ml of water , and titrate the solution with 
0.1 N sodium thiosulphate . Pass chlorine, washed and dried, through the remainder of the iodine soluti on until the 
amount of 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate required for the titration is approximately, but more than, doubled.  
 
(2)  Iodine trichloride 8 g 
 Iodine 9 g 
 Carbon tetrachloride 300 ml 
 Glacial acetic acid, sufficient to produce 1000 ml 
 
Dissolve the iodine trichloride in about 200 ml of glacial acetic a cid, dissolve the iodine in the carbon 
tetrachloride, mix the two solutions, and add sufficient glacial acet ic acid to produce 1000 ml. Iodine Monochloride 
Solution should be kept in a stoppered bottle, protected from light and stored in a cool place. 
 
B. Pyridine Bromide Method - Place the substance, accurately weighed, in a dry iodine flask, add 10 ml of 
carbon tetrachloride and dissolve. Add 25 ml of pyridine bromide solution, allow to stand for ten minutes i n a dark 
place and complete the determination described under iodine monochloride met hod, beginning with the words. 
Add 15 ml. 
 
The approximate weight in gram, of the substance to be taken may be calculated by dividing 12.5 by the 
highest expected iodine value. If more than half the available halogen is absorbed the te st must be repeated, a small 
quantity of the substance being used. 
  CCCXXXIV  Pyridine bromide Solution: Dissolve 8 g pyridine and 10 g of sulphuric acid  in 20 ml of glacial acetic 
acid , keeping the mixture cool. Add 8 g of bromine  dissolved in 20 ml of glacial acetic acid  and dilute to 100 ml 
with glacial acetic acid . 
 
Pyridine bromide Solution should be freshly prepared. 
 
3.9. - DETERMINATION OF ACID VALUE  
 
The acid value is the number of mg of potassium hydroxide required to neutralize the free acids in 1 g of 
the substance, when determined by the following method: 
 
Weigh accurately about 10 g of the substance (1 to 5) in the case of a resin into a 250 ml flask and add 50 
ml of a mixture of equal volumes of alcohol and solvent ether, which has bee n neutralized after the addition of 1 ml 
of solution of phenolphthalein. Heat gently on a water-bath, if necessary until the subs tance has completely melted, 
titrate with 0.1 N potassium hydroxide , shaking constantly until a pink colour which persists for fifteen s econds is 
obtained. Note the number of ml required. Calculate the acid value from the following form ula: 
 
   a × 0.00561 × 1000 
 Acid Value =  -------------------------------- 
    W 
 
Where ‘a’ is the number of ml of 0.1 N potassium hydroxide required and ‘W’ is the weight in g of the 
substance taken. 
 
3.10. - DETERMINATION OF PEROXIDE VALUE 
 
The peroxide value is the number of milliequivalents of active oxyge n that expresses the amount of 
peroxide contained in 1000 g of the substance. 
 
Method 
 
Unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph, weigh 5 g of the  substance being examined, 
accurately weighed, into a 250-ml glass-stoppered conical flask, a dd 30 ml of a mixture of 3 volumes of glacial 
acetic acid and 2 volumes of chloroform, swirl until dissolved and add 0.5ml volumes of saturated potassium 
iodide solution. Allow to stand for exactly 1 minute, with occasional shaking, add 30 ml of water  and titrate 
gradually, with continuous and vigorous shaking, with 0.01M sodium thiosulphate until the yellow colour almost 
disappears. Add 0.5 ml of starch solution and continue the titration, shaking vigorously until the blue colour just 
disappears (a ml). Repeat the operation omitting the substance being examined (b ml). The volume of 0.01M 
sodium thiosulphate in the blank determination must not exceed 0.1 ml. 
 
Calculate the peroxide value from the expression 
 
  Peroxide value = 10 (a – b)/ W 
 
Where W = weight, in g, of the substance. 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCCXXXV 3.11. - DETERMINATION OF UNSAPONIFIABLE MATTER  
 
The unsaponifiable matter consists of substances present in oils and f ats, which are not saponifiable by 
alkali hydroxides and are determined by extraction with an organic sol vent of a solution of the saponified substance 
being examined. 
 
Method 
 
Unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph, introduce about 5 g of the substance being 
examined, accurately weighed, into a 250-ml flask fitted with a re flux condenser. Add a solution of 2 g of 
potassium hydroxide in 40 ml of ethanol (95per cent)  and heat on a water-bath for 1 hour, shaking frequently. 
Transfer the contents of the flask to a separating funnel with the  aid of 100 ml of hot water and, while the liquid is 
still warm, shake very carefully with three quantities, each of 100 ml, of peroxide-free ether. Combine the ether 
extracts in a second separating funnel containing 40 ml of water, swi rl gently for a few minute, allow to separate 
and reject the lower layer. Wash the ether extract with two quant ities, each of 40 ml, of water and with three 
quantities, each of 40 ml, of a 3 per cent w/v solution of potassium hydroxide, each treatment being followed by a 
washing with 40 ml of water. Finally, wash the ether layer with successive quantities, each of 40 ml, of water until 
the aqueous layer is not alkaline to phenolphthalein solution.  Transfer the ether layer to a weighed flask, washing 
out the separating funnel with peroxide-free ether.  Distil off the ether and add to the residue 6 ml of acetone. 
Remove the solvent completely from the flask with the aid of a gentle current of air. Dry at 100 0 to 105 0 for 30 
minutes. Cool in a desiccator and weigh the residue. Calculate the unsaponifiable matt er as per cent w/w. 
 
Dissolve the residue in 20 ml of ethanol (95per cent) , previously neutralised to phenolphthalein solution and titrate 
with 0.1M ethanolic potassium hydroxide.  If the volume of 0.1M ethanolic potassium hydroxide exceeds 0.2 ml, 
the amount weighed cannot be taken as the unsaponifiable matter and the test must be repe ated. 
 
3.12. - DETECTION OF MINERAL OIL (HOLDE’S TEST)  
 
Take 22 ml of the alcoholic potassium hydroxide solution in a conical fla sk and add 1ml of the sample of 
the oil to be tested. Boil in a water bath using an air or water cooled condenser till the solution becomes clear and 
no oily drops are found on the sides of the flask. Take out the flask f rom the water bath, transfer the contents to a 
wide mouthed warm test tube and carefully add 25ml of boiling distille d water along the side of the test tube. 
Continue shaking the tube lightly from side to side during the addition. T he turbidity indicates presence of mineral 
oil, the depth of turbidity depends on the percentage of mineral oil present. 
 
3.13. - RANCIDITY TEST  (KREIS TEST)   
 
The test depends upon the formation of a red colour when oxidized fat is tr eated with conc. hydrochloric 
acid  and a solution of phloroglucinol in ether. The compound in rancid fats responsibl e for the colour reaction is 
epihydrin aldehyde. All oxidized fats respond to the Kreis test and the intensity of the colour produced is roughly 
proportional to the degree of oxidative rancidity. 
 
Procedure 
 
Mix 1 ml of melted fat and 1 ml of conc. hydrochloric acid  in a test tube. Add 1 ml of a 1 per cent solution 
of phloroglucinol in diethyl ether  and mix thoroughly with the fat-acid mixture. A pink colour formation indi cates 
that the fat is slightly oxidized while a red colour indicates that the fat is defi nitely oxidized. 
 
3.14. Determination of Reichert-Meissl and Polenske Value 
  CCCXXXVI  The Reichert-Meissl value is the number of millitres of 0.1N aque ous sodium hydroxide solution required to 
neutralize steam volatile water soluble fatty acids distill ed from 5g of an oil/fat under the prescribed conditions. It 
is a measure of water soluble steam volatile fatty acids chiefly butric a nd caprole acids present in oil or fat. 
The Polenske value is the number of millitres of 0.1N aqueous alkali  solution required to neutralize steam 
volatile water insoluble fatty acids distilled from 5 g of the oil/fat under the prescribed conditions. It is a measure 
of the steam volatile and water insoluble fatty acids, chiefly caprylic, capr ic and lauric acids present in oil and fat. 
 
Principle: 
 
The material is saponified by heating with glycerol sodium hydroxide solution and then split by treatment with 
dilute sulfuric acid. The volatile acids are immediately stea m distilled. The soluble volatile acids in the distillate are 
filtered out and estimated by titration with standard sodium hydroxide solution. 
 
Reagents  
 
a. Glycerine: Analytical reagent grade 
b. Concentrated sodium hydroxide solution: 50 percent (w/w) 
c. Pumice stone grains 
d. Dilute sulfuric acid solution: Approximately 1.0 N 
e. Sodium hydroxide solution: 0.1N solution in water, accurately standardized 
f. Phenolphthalein indicator: Dissolve 0.1g of phenolphthalein in 100 ml of ethyl alcohol 
g. Ethyl alcohol: 90% by volume and neutral to phenolphthalein 
 
Procedure  
 
Weigh accurately 5 ± 0.1 g of filtered oil or fat sample into a clean, dry, 300 ml distilling flask. Add 20 g 
of glycerine and 2 ml of concentrated sodium hydroxide solution, and heat wit h swirling over a flame until 
completely saponified, as shown by the mixture becoming perfectly cle ar. Cool the content slightly and add 90 ml 
of boiling distilled water, which has been vigorously boiled for about 15 m in. After thorough mixing the solution 
should remain clear. If the solution is not clear (indicating incomplete saponifi cation) or is darker than light yellow 
(indicating over-heating), repeat the saponification with a fresh s ample of the oil or fat. If the sample is old , the 
solution may some times be dark and not clear. 
 
Add about 0.1 g of pumic stone grains, and 50 ml of dilute sulfuric acid solut ion. Immediately connect the 
flask to the distillation apparatus. Heat very gently until the liberated fatty acids melt and separate. Then set the 
flame so that 110 ml of distillate shall be collected within 19 to 21 min. The beginning of the distillation is to be 
taken as the moment when the first drop forms in the still head. Col lect the distallate in a graduated flask. The 
temperature of the issuing distillate should be between 18° to 21°C.  
 
When the distillate exactly reaches the 110 ml mark on the flask, r emove the flame and quickly replace the 
flask by a 25 ml measuring cylinder. Stopper the graduated flask a nd without mixing place it in a water bath 
maintain at 15°C for 10 min so that the 110 ml graduation mark is 1 cm  below the water level in the bath. Remove 
the graduated flask from the cold water bath, dry the outside and mix the content gently by inverting the flask 4 or 
5 times without shaking. Avoid wetting the stopper with the insoluble a cids. Filter the liquid through a dry, 9 cm 
Whatman No.4 filter paper. The filtrate should be clear. Pipette 100 ml of the filtrate and add 5 drops of the 
phenolophthalein solution, and titrate against standard 0.1 N sodium hydroxide solut ion. Run a Blank Test without 
the fat, but using the same quantities of the reagents. 
  CCCXXXVII  Calculation  
 
Reichert-Meissl Value = (A-B) x N x 11 
where, 
 
A = Volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution required for the test; 
B = Volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution required for the blank; 
N = Normality of standard sodium hydroxide solution. 
 
After titrating the soluble volatile acids, detach the still he ad and rinse the condenser with three successive 
15 ml portions of cold distilled water passing each washing separate ly through the measuring cylinder, 110 ml 
graduated flask and the filter paper and allow all of it to pass through. Discar d all the washings. Place the funnel on 
a clean conical flask. Dissolve the insoluble fatty acids by thr ee similar washings of the condenser, the measuring 
cylinder, the 110 ml flask with stopper, and the filter paper with 15 m l portions of ethyl alcohol. Combine the 
alcoholic washings in a clean flask, add 5 drops of phenolphthalein indicator  solution, and titrate with standard 
(0.1N) sodium hydroxide solution. 
 
Polenske Value = 10 x V x N 
where, 
 
V = Volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution required for the test; 
N = Normality of the standard sodium hydroxide solution.  
 
3.15. - DETERMINATION OF ALCOHOL CONTENT 
 
The ethanol content of a liquid is expressed as the number of volumes of ethanol contained in 100 vol umes 
of the liquid, the volumes being measured at 24.9 0 to 25.1 0. This is known as the “percentage of ethanol by 
volume”. The content may also be expressed in g of ethanol per 100 g of t he liquid. This is known as the 
‘percentage of ethanol by weight”. 
 
Use Method I or Method II, as appropriate, unless otherwise specified in the individual monog raph. 
 
Method I 
 
Carry out the method for gas chromatography, using the following solutions . Solution (1) contains 5.0 per 
cent v/v of ethanol and 5.0 per cent v/v of 1-propanol (internal standard). For solution (2) dilute a volume of the 
preparation being examined with water to contain between 4.0 and 6.0 per cent  v/v of ethanol. Prepare solution (3) 
in the same manner as solution (2) but adding sufficient of the interna l standard to produce a final concentration of 
5.0 per cent v/v. 
 
The chromatographic procedure may be carried out using a column (1.5 m x 4 mm) packed with porous 
polymer beads (100 to 120 mesh) and maintained at 150 0, with both the inlet port and the detector at 170 0, and 
nitrogen as the carrier gas.  
 
Calculate the percentage content of ethanol from the areas of the peaks due to ethanol  in the chromatogram 
obtained with solutions (1) and (3). 
 
 
 
 
  CCCXXXVIII  Method II 
 
For preparations where the use of Industrial Methylated Spirit is permitted in the monograph, determine 
the content of ethanol as described in Method I but using as solution (2) a  volume of the preparation being 
examined diluted with water to contain between 4.0 and 6.0 per cent v/v of total ethanol and methano l. 
 
Determine the concentration of methanol in the following manner. Carry  out the chromatographic 
procedure described under Method I but using the following solutions. Solution (1)  contains 0.25 per cent v/v of 
methanol and 0.25 per cent v/v of 1-propanol (internal standard). For solution (2) dilute a volume of the 
preparation being examined with water to contain between 0.2 per cent and 0.3 per cent v/v of methanol. Prepare 
solution (3) in the same manner as solution (2) but adding sufficient of the internal standard to produce a final 
concentration of 0.25 per cent v/v. 
 
The sum of the contents of ethanol and methanol is within the range specif ied in the individual monograph 
and the ration of the content of methanol to that of ethanol is commensura te with Industrial Methylated Spirit 
having been used. 
 
Method III 
 
This method is intended only for certain liquid preparations containing et hanol. Where the preparation 
contains dissolved substances that may distil along with ethanol Method III B or III C  must be followed. 
 
Apparatus  
 
The apparatus (see Fig. 3) consists of a round-bottomed flask (A) fi tted with a distillation head (B) with a 
steam trap and attached to a vertical condenser (C). A tube is f itted to the lower part of the condenser and carries 
the distillate into the lower part of a 100-ml or 250-ml volumetric  flask (D). The volumetric flask is immersed in a 
beaker (E) containing a mixture of ice and water during the distil lation. A disc with a circular aperture, 6 cm in 
diameter, is placed under the distillation flask (A) to reduce the risk of charri ng of any dissolved substances. 
 
Method III A 
 
Transfer 25 ml of the preparation being examined, accurately measure d at 24.9 0 to 25.1 0, to the distillation 
flask. Dilute with 150 ml of water and add a little pumice powder. At tach the distillation head and condenser. Distil 
and collect not less than 90 ml of the distillate into a 100-ml volum etric flask. Adjust the temperature to 24.9 0 to 
25.1 0 and dilute to volume with distilled water at 24.9 0 to 25.1 0. Determine the relative density at 24.9 0 to 25.1 0. 
The values indicated in column 2 of Table 3.2  are multiplied by 4 in orde r to obtain the percentage of ethanol by 
volume contained in the preparation. If the specific gravity is found to be between two values, the percentage of 
ethanol should be obtained by interpolation. After calculation of the ethanol content, report the result to one 
decimal place. 
 
NOTE – (1) If excessive frothing is encountered during distillation, render the solution strongly acid with 
phosphoric acid or treat with a small amount of liquid paraffin or silicone oil.   
 
(2) The distillate should be clear or not more than slightly cloudy. I f it is turbid or contains oily drops, follow 
Method IIIC. When steam-volatile acids are present, make the sol ution just alkaline with 1M sodium hydroxide 
using solid phenolphthalein as indicator before distillation. 
 
 
 
  CCCXXXIX  Method III B 
 
Follow this method or the following one if the preparation being examined contains appreciable 
proportions of volatile materials other than ethanol and water. 
 
Mix 25 ml of the preparation, accurately measured at 24 0 to 25.1 0, with about 100 ml of water in a separating 
funnel. Saturate this mixture with sodium chloride, add about 100 ml of hexane and shake vigorously for 2 to 3 
minutes. Allow the mixture to stand for 15 to 20 minutes. Run the lower la yer into the distillation flask, wash the 
hexane layer in the separating funnel by shaking vigorously with about 25 ml of  sodium chloride  solution, allow to 
separate and run the wash liquor into the first saline solution. Make the mixed solutions just alkaline with 1M 
sodium hydroxide using solid phenolphthalein as indicator, add a little pumice powder and 100 ml of water, distil 
90 ml and determine the percentage v/v of  ethanol by Method IIIA beginning at the words “Adj ust the  
temperature…”. 
 
 
 
 
      
   
 
 
Fig.3. Apparatus for Determination of Ethanol by Distillation Method.  
 
 
 
 
 
  CCCXL   
 
 
Table 3.2 
 
Specific gravity at 25 0 Ethanol content* 
1.0000 
0.9985 
0.9970 
0.9956 
0.9941 
0.9927 
0.9914 
0.9901 
0.9888 
0.9875 
0.9862 
0.9850 
0.9838 
0.9826 
0.9814 
0.9802 
0.9790 
0.9778 
0.9767 
0.9756 
0.9744 
0.9733 
0.9721 
0.9710 
0.9698 
0.9685 0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
 
* per cent v/v at 15.56 0. 
 
Method III C 
 
Transfer 25 ml of the preparation, accurately measured at 24.9 0 to 25.1 0, to the distillation flask. Dilute 
with 150 ml of water and add a little pumice powder. Attach the disti llation head and condenser. Distil and collect 
about 100 ml. Transfer to a separating funnel and determine the percenta ge v/v of ethanol by Method III B 
beginning at the words “Saturate this mixture…”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCCXLI  APPENDIX –4 
   
4.1. REAGENTS AND SOLUTIONS 
   
Acetate buffer 5.5 pH  – Dissolve 21.5 g of sodium acetate  (AR) in 300 ml purified water  containing 2 ml glacial 
acetic acid  and dilute to 1000 ml  
 
Acetic Acid  –Contains approximately 33 per cent w/v of C 2H4O2. Dilute 315 ml of glacial acetic acid to 1000 ml 
with water . 
 
Acetic Acid, Glacial – CH 3COOH =60.05. 
 
Contains not less than 99.0 per cent w/w of C 2H4O2. About 17.5 N in strength. 
 
Description   –At temperature above its freezing point a clear colourless liquid, odour, pungent and 
characteristic; crystallises when cooled to about 10 0 and does not completely re-melt until warmed to 
about 15 0. 
 
Solubility  – Miscible with water, with glycerin and most fixed and volatile oils. 
 
Boiling range  –Between 117 0 and 119 0. 
 
Congealing temperature  –Not lower than 14.8 0. 
 
Wt. per ml  –At 25 0about 1.047 g. 
 
Heavy metals  –Evaporate 5 ml to dryness in a porcelain dish on water-bath, warm the  residue with 2 ml of 
0.1 N hydrochloric acid  and water to make 25 ml; the limit of heavy metals is 10 parts per million, 
Appendix 2.3.3. 
 
Chloride  –5 ml complies with the limit test for chlorides, Appendix 2.3.2. 
 
Sulphate  –5 ml complies with the limit test for sulphates,  
 
Certain aldehydic substances  –To 5 ml add 10 ml of mercuric chloride solution and make alkaline with 
sodium hydroxide solution, allow to stand for five minutes and acidify with dilute sulphuric  acid ; the 
solution does not show more than a faint turbidity. 
 
Formic acid and oxidisable impurities  –Dilute 5 ml with 10 ml of water, to 5 ml of this solution add 2.0 ml of  
0.1  N potassium dichromate and 6 ml of sulphuric acid, and allow to stand for one minute, add 25 ml of 
water, cool to 15 0, and add 1 ml of freshly prepared potassium iodide solution and titrate t he liberated 
iodine with 0.1  N sodium thiosulphate, using starch solution as indicator. Not less than 1 ml  of 0. N 
sodium thiosulphate is required.   
 
Odorous impurities  –Neutralise 1.5 ml with sodium hydroxide solution ; the solution has no odour other than 
a faint acetous odour. 
  CCCXLII  Readily oxidisable impurities  –To 5 ml of the solution prepared for the test for Formic Acid and Ox idisable 
Impurities, add 20 ml of water and 0.5 ml of 0.1 N potassium permanganate;  the pink colour does not 
entirely disappear within half a minute. 
 
Non-volatile matter  –Leaves not more than 0.01 per cent w/w of residue when evaporated to dryne ss and 
dried to constant weight at 105 0. 
 
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 1 g into a stoppered flask containing 50 ml of water  and titrate with N 
sodium hydroxide, using phenolphthalein solution as indicator. Each ml of sodium hydroxide is 
equivalent to 0.06005 g of C 2H4O2. 
 
Acetic Acid, Lead-Free  –Acetic acid which complies with following additional test, boil 25 m l until the 
volume is reduced to about 15 ml, cool make alkaline with lead-free amm onia solution, add 1 ml of lead 
free potassium cyanide solution, dilute  to 50 ml with water, add 2 drops of sodium sulphide solution; no 
darkening is produced. 
 
Acetone  – Propan-2-one; (CH 3)2CO = 58.08 
 
Description  –Clear, colourless, mobile and volatile liquid; taste, pungent and sweeti sh; odour 
characteristic; flammable. 
 
Solubility  –Miscible with water , with alcohol, with solvent ether, and with chloroform, forming clear 
solutions. 
 
Distillation range  –Not less than 96.0 per cent distils between 55.5 0 and 57 0. 
 
Acidity  –10 ml diluted with 10 ml of freshly boiled and cooled water; does not requi re for neutralisation 
more than 0.2 ml of 0.1  N sodium hydroxide , using phenolphthalein solution as indicator. 
 
Alkalinty  –10 ml diluted with 10 ml of freshly boiled and cooled water, is not alkaline to litmus solution.  
 
Methyl alcohol  –Dilute 10 ml with water to 100 ml. To 1 ml of the solution add 1 ml of water and 2 ml of 
potassium permanganate and phosphoric acid solution . Allow to stand for ten minutes and add 2 ml of 
oxalic acid and sulphuric acid solution;  to the colourless solution add 5 ml of decolorised magenta 
solution and set aside for thirty minutes between 15 0 and 30 0; no colour is produced.   
 
Oxidisable substances  –To 20 ml add 0.1 ml of 0.1 N potassium permanganate, and allow to stand for 
fifteen minutes; the solution is not completely decolorised. 
 
Water  –Shake 10 ml with 40 ml of carbon disulphide ; a clear solution is produced. 
 
Non-volatile matter  –When evaporated on a water-bath and dried to constant weight at 105 0, leaves not 
more than 0.01 per cent w/v residue. 
 
Acetone Solution, Standard  – A 0.05 per cent v/v solution of acetone in water.  CCCXLIII   
Alcohol – 
 
Description   –Clear, colourless, mobile, volatile liquid, odour, characteristic and spi rituous; taste, burning, 
readily volatilised even at low temperature, and boils at about 78 0, flammable. Alcohol containing not 
less than 94.85 per cent v/v and not more than 95.2 per cent v/v of C 2H5OH at 15.56 0. 
 
Solubility – Miscible in all proportions with water, with chloroform and with solvent ether. 
 
Acidity or alkalinity  –To 20 ml add five drops of phenolphthalein solution ; the solution remains colourless 
and requires not more than 2.0 ml of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide to produce a pink colour. 
 
Specific gravity  –Between 0.8084 and 0.8104 at 25 0. 
 
Clarity of solution  –Dilute 5 ml to 100 ml with water in glass cylinder; the solution remains clear when 
examined against a black background. Cool to 10 0 for thirty minutes; the solution remains clear. 
 
Methanol  –To one drop add one of water, one drop of dilute phosphoric acid, and one drop of potassium 
permanganate solution. Mix, allow to stand for one minute and add sodium bisulphite solution dropwise, 
until the permanganate colour is discharged. If a brown colour remains, add one drop of dilute phosphoric 
acid. To the colourless solution add 5 ml of freshly prepared chromotropic acid solution and heat on a 
water-bath at 60 0 for ten minutes; no violet colour is produced. 
 
Foreign organic substances  –Clean a glass-stoppered cylinder thoroughly with hydrochloric acid, rinse with 
water and finally rinse with the alcohol under examination. Put 20 ml in the cylinder, cool to about 15 0 
and then add from a carefully cleaned pipette 0.1 ml 0.1  N potassium permanganate. Mix at once by 
inverting the stoppered cylinder and allow to stand at 15 0 for five minutes; the pink colour does not 
entirely disappear. 
 
Isopropyl alcohol and t-butyl alcohol  –To 1 ml add 2 ml of water and 10 ml of mercuric sulphate solution  and 
heat in a boiling water-bath; no precipitate is formed within three minutes. 
 
Aldehydes and ketones  –Heat 100 ml of hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution  in a loosely stoppered flask 
on a water-bath for thirty minutes, cool, and if necessary, add suffic ient 0.05 N sodium hydroxide  to 
restore the green colour. To 50 ml of this solution add 25 ml of the alcohol  and heat on a water bath for 
ten minutes in a loosely stoppered flask. Cool, transfer to a Nesseler cylinder , and titrate with 0.05 N 
sodium hydroxide until the colour matches that of the remainder of the hydroxylamine hydrochloride 
solution contained in a similar cylinder, both solutions being viewed down the axis  of the cylinder. Not 
more than 0.9 ml of 0.05 N sodium hydroxide is required. 
  
Fusel oil constituents  –Mix 10 ml with 5 ml of water and 1 ml of  glycerin and allow the mixture to 
evaporate spontaneously from clean, odourless absorbent paper; no foreign odour i s perceptible at any 
stage of the evaporation. 
 
Non-volatile matter  –Evaporate 40 ml in a tared dish on a water-bath and dry the residue a t 105º for one 
hour; the weight of the residue does not exceed 1 mg. 
  CCCXLIV  Storage –Store in tightly-closed containers, away from fire. 
 
Labelling  –The label on the container states “Flammable”. 
  
Alcohol, Aldehyde-free.  –Alcohol which complies with the following additional test : 
 
Aldehyde  –To 25 ml, contained in 300 ml flask, add 75 ml of dinitrophenyl hydrazine solution, heat on a water bath 
under a reflux condenser for twenty four hours, remove the alcohol by disti llation, dilute to 200 ml with a 2 per 
cent v/v solution of sulphuric acid, and set aside for twenty four hours; no crystals are pr oduced. 
 
Alcohol, Sulphate-free.  –Shake alcohol with an excess of anion exchange resin for thirty mi nutes and 
filter. 
 
. –Solutions of any normality xN may be prepared by diluting 75 x ml of s trong ammonia solution to 1000 ml 
with water. 
 
Ammonia Solution, Iron-free  –Dilute ammonia solution which complies with the following additional 
test: 
 
Evaporate 5 ml nearly to dryness on a water-bath add 40 ml of water, 2 ml of 20 per cent w/v solution of 
iron free citric acid  and 2 drops of thioglycollic acid , mix, make alkaline with iron-free  ammonia solution 
and dilute  to 50 ml with water , no pink colour is produced. 
 
Ammonia buffer solutions 9.5 pH  – Dissolve 67.5 g ammonium chloride  in 300 ml purified  water , add 570 ml 
ammonia solution  and dilute to 1000 ml. 
 
Ammonium Chloride Solution  –A 10.0 per cent w/v solution of ammonium chloride  in water. 
 
Ammonium molybdate - NH 4Mo 7O24 .4H 2O=1235.86 
Analytical reagent grade of commerce. 
White crystal or crystalline masses, sometimes with a yellowish or gre en tint.  
  
Ammonium Thiocyanate – NH 4SCN = 76.12. 
 
Description   –Colourless crystals. 
 
Solubility – Very soluble in water, forming a clear solution, readily soluble in alcohol. 
 
Chloride –Dissolve 1 g in 30 ml of solution of hydrogen peroxide, add 1 g of sodium hydroxide , warm 
gently, rotate the flask until a vigorous reaction commences and all ow to stand until the reaction is 
complete; add a further 30 ml of hydrogen peroxide solution boil for two minutes, cool, and add 10 ml of 
dilute nitric acid and 1 ml of silver nitrate solution ; any opalescence produced is not greater than that 
obtained by treating 0.2 ml of 0.01 N hydrochloric acid in the same manner. 
 
Sulphated ash  –Moisten 1 g with sulphuric acid  and ignite gently, again moisten with sulphuric acid and 
ignite; the residue weighs not more than 2.0 mg. 
  CCCXLV  Ammonium Thiocyanate, 0.1N  – NH 4SCN = 76.12; 7.612 in 1000 ml. Dissolve about 8 g of ammonium 
thiocyanate  in 100o ml of water and standardise the solution as follows : 
 
Pipette 30 ml of standardised 0.1  N silver nitrate into a glass stoppered flask, dilute with 50 ml of 
water then add 2 ml of nitric acid and 2 ml of ferric ammonium sulphate solution and titrate with the 
ammonium thiocyanate solution to the first appearance of a red brown colour. Each ml of 0.1N silver 
nitrate  is equivalent to 0.007612 g of NH 4SCN. 
 
Ammonium Thiocyanate Solution – A 10.0 per cent w/v solution of ammonium thiocyanate solution . 
 
Aniline chloride solution  – To 100 ml of aniline, add 30 ml of hydrochloric acid. (10:3). 
 
Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric Acid Reagent – 0.5 ml anisaldehyde is mixed with 10 ml glacial acetic acid , 
followed by 85 ml methanol and 5 ml concentrated sulphuric acid in that order. 
 
The reagent has only limited stability and is no longer usable when the colour has turned to 
redviolet. 
 
Arsenomolybdic Acid Reagent - 250 mg of ammonium molybdate was dissolved in 45 ml of distilled 
water. To this, 2.1 ml of concentrated H 2SO 4 was added and mixed well. To this solution, 3mg of 
Na 2ASO 4.7 H 2O dissolved in 25 ml of distilled water, mixed well and placed in inc ubator maintained at 
37 0 C for 24 h. 
 
Borax - Sodium Tetraborate, Na 2B4O7. 10H 2O = 381.37.  
Contains not less than 99.0 per cent and not more than the equivalent of 103.0 per cent of Na 2B4O7. 
10H 2O. 
 
Description   –Transparent, colourless crystals, or a white, crystalline powder;  odourless, taste, saline and 
alkaline. Effloresces in dry air, and on ignition, loses all its water of crystal lisation. 
 
Solubility  –Soluble in water, practically insoluble in alcohol. 
 
Alkalinity  –A solution is alkaline to litmus solution. 
 
Heavy metals   – Dissolve 1 g in 16 ml of water and 6 ml of N hydrochloric acid and add water to make 25 
ml; the limit of heavy metals is 20 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.3. 
 
Iron –0.5 g complies with the limit test for iron , Appendix 2.3.4. 
 
Chlorides –1 g complies with the limit test for chlorides,  Appendix 2.3.2. 
 
Sulphates –1g complies with the limit test for sulphates,  Appendix 2.3.6. 
 
Assay –Weigh accurately about 3 g and dissolve in 75 ml of water  and titrate with 0.5 N hydrochloric 
acid , using methyl red solution  as indicator. Each ml of 0.5  N hydrochloric acid is equivalent to 0.09534 g 
of Na 2B4O7.10H 2O. 
  CCCXLVI  Storage – Preserve Borax in well-closed container. 
 
Bromine  – Br 2 =159.80. 
 
Description  –Reddish-brown, fuming, corrosive liquid. 
 
Solubility  –Slightly soluble in water , soluble in most organic solvents. 
 
Iodine  –Boil 0.2 ml with 20 ml of  water , 0.2 ml of N sulphuric acid and a small piece of marble until the 
liquid is almost colourless. Cool, add one drop of liquefied phenol , allow to stand for two minutes, and 
then add 0.2 g of potassium iodide  and 1 ml of starch solution ; no blue colour is produced. 
 
Sulphate  –Shake 3 ml with 30 ml of dilute ammonia solution and evaporate to dryness on a water bath, the 
residue complies with the limit test for sulphates , Appendix 2.3.6. 
 
Bromine Solution  – Dissolve 9.6 ml of  bromine  and 30 g of potassium bromide in sufficient water to 
produce 100 ml. 
 
Bromophenol Blue Indicator  – Dissolve 0.1 g of bromophenol blue in 3.0 ml of 0.05 N sodium 
hydroxide solution and 5 ml of ethyl alcohol (90 percent by volume) by gently  warming. Make up the 
volume of the solution with ethyl alcohol (20 percent v/v) to 250 ml in a volumetric flask.  
Canada Balsam Reagent –General reagent grade of commerce. 
 
Carbon Tetrachloride – CCl 4 = 153.82 
 
Description   –Clear, colourless, volatile, liquid; odour, characteristic. 
 
Solubility  –Practically insoluble in water; miscible with ethyl alcohol, and with solvent et her.  
 
Distillation range   –Not less than 95 per cent distils between 76 0 and 77 0.  
 
Wt. per ml  – At 20 0, 1.592 to 1.595 g. 
 
Chloride, free acid  –Shake 20 ml with 20 ml of freshly boiled and cooled water for three mi nutes and allow 
separation to take place; the aqueous layer complies with the following test : 
 
Chloride  – To 10 ml add one drop of nitric acid and 0.2 ml of silver nitrate solution ; no opalescence is 
produced. 
 
Free acid  –To 10 ml add a few drops of bromocresol purple solution;  the colour produced does not 
indicate more acidity than that indicated by the addition of the same  quantity of the indicator to 10 ml of 
freshly boiled and cooled water. 
 
Free chlorine  –Shake 10 ml with 5 ml of cadmium iodide solution  and 1 ml of starch solution , no blue 
colour is produced. 
  CCCXLVII  Oxidisable impurities  –Shake 20 ml for five minutes with a cold mixture of 10 ml of sulphuric acid and 10 
ml of 0.1 N potassium dichromate , dilute with 100 ml of water and add 3 g of potassium  iodide  : the 
liberated iodine requires for decolourisation not less than 9 ml of 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate . 
 
Non-volatile matter  –Leaves on evaporation on a water-bath and drying to constant weight at 105 0 not more 
than 0.002 per cent w/v of residue. 
 
Caustic Alkali Solution, 5 per cent  – Dissolve 5 g of potassium or sodium hydroxide in water and dilute 
to 100 ml. 
 
Charcoal, Decolourising  –General purpose grade complying with the following test. 
 
Decolourising powder  –Add 0.10 g to 50 ml of 0.006 per cent w/v solution of bromophenol blue  in ethanol 
(20 per cent) contained in a 250 ml flask, and mix. Allow to stand for fi ve minutes, and filter; the colour 
of the filtrate is not deeper than that of a solution prepared by dilut ing 1 ml of the bromophenol blue 
solution with ethanol (20 per cent) to 50 ml. 
 
Chloral Hydrate –CCl 3.CH(OH) 2 = 165.40. 
 
Description   –Colourless, transparent crystals, odour, pungent but not acrid; taste, punge nt and slightly 
bitter, volatilises slowly on exposure to air. 
 
Solubility  –Very soluble in water, freely soluble in alcohol , in chloroform and in solvent ether . 
 
Chloral alcoholate  – Warm 1 g with 6 ml of water  and 0.5 ml of sodium hydroxide solution  : filter, add 
sufficient 0. 1 N iodine  to impart a deep brown colour, and set aside for one hour; no yellow crys talline 
precipitate is produced and no smell of iodoform is perceptible. 
 
Chloride  – 3 g complies with the limit test for chlorides, Appendix 2.3.2.  
 
Assay  – Weigh accurately about 4 g and dissolve in 10 ml of water  and add 30 ml of N sodium hydroxide. 
Allow the mixture to stand for two minutes, and then titrate with N sulphuric acid using phenolphthalein 
solution as indicator. Titrate the neutralised liquid with 0.1 N silver nitrate using solution of potassium 
chromate as indicator. Add two-fifteenth of the amount of 0.1 N silver nitrate used to the amount of N 
sulphuric acid used in the first titration and deduct the figure so obtained from the amount of N sodium 
hydroxide added. Each ml of N sodium hydroxide, obtained as difference; is equivalent to 0.1654 g of 
C2H3Cl 3O2. 
 
Storage  – Store in tightly closed, light resistant containers in a cool place. 
 
Chloral Hydrate Solution  –Dissolve 20 g of chloral hydrate in 5 ml of water with warming and add 5 
ml of glycerin . 
 
Chloral Iodine Solution  –Add an excess of crystalline iodine with  shaking to the chloral hydrate 
solution , so that crystals of undissolved iodine remain on the bottom of bottle. Sha ke before use as the  CCCXLVIII  iodine dissolves, and crystals of the iodine to the solution. Store in a bot tle of amber glass in a place 
protected from light. 
 
Chloroform – CHCl 3 = 119.38 
 
Description   –Colourles, volatile liquid; odour, characteristic. Taste, sweet and burning. 
 
Solubility  –Slightly soluble in water; freely miscible with ethyl alcohol and with solvent e ther. 
 
Wt. per ml . : Between 1.474 and 1.478 g. 
 
Boiling range  – A variable fraction, not exceeding 5 per cent v/v, distils below 60 0 and the remainder distils 
between 50 0 to 62 0. 
 
Acidity  –Shake 10 ml with 20 ml of freshly boiled and cooled water for three m inutes, and allow to 
separate. To a 5 ml portion of the aqueous layer add 0.1 ml of litmus solution ; the colour produced is not 
different from that produced on adding 0.1 ml of litmus solution  to 5 ml of freshly boiled and cooled 
water . 
 
Chloride  –To another 5 ml portion of the aqueous layer obtained in the test for Ac idity, add 5 ml of water 
and 0.2 ml of silver nitrate solution ; no opalescence is produced. 
 
Free chlorine  –To another 10 ml portion of the aqueous layer, obtained in the test for Ac idity, add 1 ml of 
cadmium iodide solution  and two drops of starch solution; no blue colour is produced. 
 
Aldehyde –Shake 5 ml with 5 ml of water and 0.2 ml of alkaline potassium mercuri-iodide  solution in a 
stoppered bottle and set aside in the dark for fifteen minutes; not mor e than a pale yellow colour is 
produced. 
 
Decomposition products  – Place 20 ml of the chloroform in a glass-stoppered flask, previously rinsed with 
sulphuric acid,  add 15 ml of sulphuric acid  and four drops of formaldehyde solution , and shake the 
mixture frequently during half an hour and set aside for further half an hour, the flask being protected 
from light during the test; the acid layer is not more than slightly coloured. 
 
Foreign organic matter  – Shake 20 ml with 10 ml of sulphuric acid in a stoppered vessel previously rinsed 
with sulphuric acid  for five minutes and set aside in the dark for thirty minutes, both t he acid and 
chloroform layers remain colourless. To 2 ml of the acid layer add 5 ml of water; the liquid remains 
colourless and clear, and has no unpleasent odour. Add a further 10 ml of wate r and 0.2 ml of silver 
nitrate solution ; no opalescence is produced.  
 
Foreign odour  –Allow 10 ml to evaporate from a large piece of filter paper pla ced on a warm plate; no 
foreign odour is detectable at any stage of the evaporation. 
 
Non volatile matter  – Not more than 0.004 per cent w/v determined on 25 ml by evaporation and drying  at 
105 0. 
  CCCXLIX                                                            Storage -  Store in tightly-closed, glass-stoppered, light-resistant bottles. 
Copper Sulphate  – CuSO 4.5H 2O = 249.68 
 
Contains not less than 98.5 per cent and not more than the equivalent of 101.0 per cent of CuSO 4.5H 2O. 
 
Description   – Blue triclinic prisms or a blue, crystalline powder. 
 
Solubility  –Soluble in water , very solube in boiling water, almost insoluble in alcohol ; very slowly soluble 
in glycerin . 
 
Acidity and clarity of solution  – 1 g, dissolved in 20 ml of water, forms a clear blue solution, which be comes 
green on the addition of 0.1 ml of methyl orange solution . 
   
Iron  – To 5 g, add 25 ml of water, and 2 ml of nitric acid, boil and cool. Add ex cess of strong ammonia 
solution , filter, and wash the residue with dilute ammonia solution  mixed with four times its volumes of 
water. Dissolve the residue, if any, on the filter with 2 ml of hydrochloric acid , diluted with 10 ml of 
water; to the acid solutions add dilute ammonia solution  till the precipitation is complete; filter and wash; 
the residue after ignition weighs not more than 7 mg. 
 
Copper Sulphate, Anhydrous – CuSO 4 =159.6 
 
Prepared by heating copper sulphate to constant weight at about 230 0. 
 
Copper Sulphate Solution  –A10.0 per cent w/v solution of copper sulphate in water . 
 
Cresol Red – 4,4 /, –(3H-2, 1-Benzoxathiol-3 ylidene) di-O-cresol SS-dioxide; C 12 H8O5S = 382.4.  
 
Gives a red colour in very strongly acid solutions, a yellow colour in less strongly acid and neutral 
solutions, and a red colour in moderately alkaline solutions ( pH ranges, 0.2 to 1.8, and 7.2 to 8.8). 
 
Cresol Red Solution –Warm 50 ml of cresol red with 2.65 ml of 0.05 M sodium hydroxide and 5 ml of  ethanol 
(90 per cent); after solution is effected, add sufficient ethanol (20 per cent)  to produce 250 
ml. 
 
Sensitivity  –A mixitue of 0.1 ml of the solution and 100 ml of carbon dioxide-free water  to which 0.15 ml 
of 0.02 M s odium hydroxide  has been added is purplish-red. Not more than 0.15 ml of 0.02 M 
hydrochloric acid  is required to change the colour to yellow. 
 
Diphenylamine barium sulphonate  – Dissolve 0.25 g in 100 ml water. 
Disodium Ethylenediamine tetraacetate – (Disodium Acetate) C 10 H14 N2Na 2O8.2H 2O  
= 372.2, Analytical reagent grade. 
 
Dragendorff ÁÁÁÁ  ÁÁÁÁs Reagent – 
 
Solution 1  –Dissolve 0.85 g of bismuth oxy nitrate  in 40 ml of water and 10 ml of acetic acid.  
  CCCL  Solution 2 –Dissolve 8 g of potassium iodide  in 20 ml of water. 
 
Mix equal volumes of solution 1 and 2, and to 10 ml of the resultant mixture  add 100 ml of water and 20 
ml of acetic acid. 
 
Dithizone- 1,5-Diphenylthiocarbazone;Diphenylthiocarbazone; C 6H5N:NCSNHNHC 6H5= 56.32 
Analytical Reagent grade of commerce. 
Almost black powder; mp, about 168 0, with decomposition. 
Store in light-resistant containers. 
 
Eosin – Acid Red 87; Tetrabromofluorescein disodium salt; C 20 H6O5Br 4Na 2 =691.86. 
 
Description   – Red powder, dissolves in water to yield a yellow to purplish-red  solution with a greenish-
yellow fluorescence. 
 
Solubility  –Soluble in water and in alcohol. 
 
Chloride  –Dissolve 50 mg in 25 ml of water , add 1 ml of nitric acid , and filter; the filtrate complies with 
the limit test for chlorides , Appendix 2.3.2. 
 
Sulphated ash  –Not more than 24.0 per cent, calculated with reference to the substanc e dried at 110 0 for 
two hours, Appendix 2.2.6. 
 
EDTA solution 0.05 M  – Dissolve 18.6120 g of sodium salt of EDTA in purified water and make up to 1000 ml. 
 
Eosin Solution – A 0.5 per cent w/v solution of eosin in water. 
 
Eriochrome Black T – Mordant Black 11; Sodium 2(1-hydroxy-2-naphthylazo) 5-nitro-2-naphtol-4-
sulphonate; C 20 H12 N3NaO 7S = 461.38. 
 
Brownish black powder having a faint, metallic sheen, soluble in alcohol, i n methyl alcohol  and in hot 
water. 
 
Eriochrome Black T indicator 0.1per cent solution  – Dissolve 0.10 g indicator in 100 ml of Methanol. 
 
Ethyl Acetate – CH 3. CO 2C2H5 = 88.11. 
 
Analytical reagent grade. 
 
A colourless liquid with a fruity odour; boiling point, about 77 0; weight per ml about 0.90g. 
 
Ethyl Alcohol – C 2H5OH = 46.07. 
 
Absolute Alcohol; Dehydrated Alcohol. 
 
Description  – Clear, colourless, mobile, volatile liquid; odour, characteristic and s pirituous; taste, burning; 
hygroscopic. Readily volatilisable even at low temperature and boils at 78 0 and is flammable.   CCCLI   
Solubility  – Miscible with water, with solvent ether and with chloroform. 
 
Contains not less than 99.5 per cent w/w or 99.7 per cent v/v of C 2H5OH. 
 
Identification – Acidity or Alkalinity: Clarity of Solution; Methanol; Foreign org anic substances; Isopropyl 
alcohol and butyl alcohol; Aldehydes and ketones; fusel oil constituents; N on-volatile matter; complies 
with the requirements described under Alcohol. 
 
Specific gravity  –Between 0.7871 and 0.7902, at 25 0. 
 
Storage  –Store in tightly closed containers in a cool place away from fire and protected from  moisture. 
 
Labelling  –The label on the container states “Flammable”. 
 
Fehling’s Solution – 
 
A. Dissolve 69.278 g of CuSO4. 5H 2O in water and make the volume up to 1 litre  
B. Dissolve 100 g of sodium hydroxide and 340 g of Sodium potassium tartarat e in water and 
make the volume to 1 litre. 
 
Mix equal volumes of A and B before the experiment. 
 
Formaldehyde Solution – Formalin; HCHO =30.03 
 
Formaldehyde Solution is a solution of formaldehyde in water with methyl alcohol  added to prevent 
polymerisation. It contains not less than 34.0 per cent w/w and not more than 38.0 per cent w/w of CH 2O. 
 
Description  – Colourless liquid; odour, characteristic, pungent and irritating; tast e, burning. A slight white 
cloudy deposit is formed on long standing, especially in the cold, due to the  separation of 
paraformaldehyde. This white deposit disappears on warming the solution. 
Solubility  –Miscible with water , and with alcohol . 
 
Acidity  –To 10 ml add 10 ml of carbon dioxide free water and titrate with 0.1 N sodium hydroxide using 
bromothymol blue solutions as indicator; not more than 5 ml of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide is required.  
 
Wt. per ml  – At 20 0, 1.079 to 1.094 g. 
 
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 3 g and add to a mixture of 50 ml of hydrogen peroxide solution  and 50 
ml of N sodium hydroxide , warm on a water-bath until effervescence ceases and titrate the excess of 
alkali with N sulphuric acid  using phenolphthalein solution  as indicator. Repeat the experiment with the 
same quantities of the same reagents in the same manner omitti ng the formaldehyde solution. The 
difference between the titrations represents the sodium hydroxide re quired to neutralise the formic acid 
produced by the oxidation of the formaldehyde. Each ml of N sodium hydroxide i s equivalent to 0.03003 
g of CH 2O.  
  CCCLII  Storage –Preserve Formaldehyde Solution in well-closed container preferably a t a temperature not below 
15 0. 
 
Formaldehyde Solution, Dilute –  Dilute 34 ml of formaldehyde solution with sufficient water to 
produce 100 ml. 
 
Folin Ciocalteu Reagent- Dilute commercially available Folin-Ciocalteu reagent (2N) wi th an equal 
volume of distilled water. Transfer it in a brown bottle and store i n a refrigerator (40). It should be 
goldern in colour. Do not use it if it turns olive green.  
 
Formic acid- HCOOH = 46.03  
 
Description -Colourless liquid, odour, very pungent, highly corrosive; wt per ml. about 1.20 g, contains 
about 90.0 per cent of HCOOH and is about 23.6 M in strength. 
 
Assay - Weigh accurately, a conical flask containing 10ml of water, quickl y add about 1ml of the reagent 
being examined and weigh again. Add 50ml of water and titrate with 1M sodium hydroxide  using 0.5 ml 
of phenolphthalein solution as indicator. Each ml of 1 M sodium hydroxide  is equivalent to 0.04603 g of 
HCOOH. 
                                               Glycerine – C 3H8O3 = 82.09. 
Description  – Clear, colorless, liquid of syrupy consistency; odourless, taste swe et followed by a sensation 
of warmth. It is hygroscopic. 
 
Solubility  –Miscible with water and with alcohol ; practically insoluble in chloroform, in solvent ether and 
in fixed oils. 
 
Acidity  –To 50 ml of a 50 per cent w/v solution add 0.2 ml of dilute phenolphthalein solution ; not more 
than 0.2 ml of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide  is required to produce a pink colour. 
 
Wt. per ml  –Between 1.252 g and 1.257 g, corresponding to between 98.0 per cent and 100.0 per cent w/ w 
of C 3H8O3. 
 
Refractive index  –Between 1.470 and 1.475 determined at 20 0.  
 
Arsenic  –Not more than 2 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.1. 
 
Copper  –To 10 ml add 30 ml of water , and 1 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid , and 10 ml of hydrogen 
sulphide solution ; no colour is produced. 
 
                                                          Iron  – 10 g complies with the limit test for iron, Appendix 2.3.4. 
Heavy metals  – Not more than 5 parts per million, determined by Method A on a solution of  4 g in 2 ml of 
0.1 N hydrochloric acid and sufficient water to produce 25 ml, Appendix 2.3.3. 
  CCCLIII  Sulphate  –1 ml complies with the limit test for sulphates, Appendix 2.3.6. 
 
                                                          Chloride  –1 ml complies with the limit test for chloride, Appendix 2.3.2. 
Acraldehyde and glucose  –Heat strongly; it assumes not more than a faint yellow, and not a pink colour. 
Heat further; it burns with little or no charring and with no odour of burnt sugar. 
 
Aldehydes and related substances  – To 12.5 ml of a 50 per cent w/v solution in a glass-stoppered flask add 
2.5 ml of water and 1 ml of decolorised magenta solution . Close the flask and allow to stand for one 
hour. Any violet colour produced is not more intense than that produced by mixing  1.6 ml of 0.1  N 
potassium permanganate and 250 ml of water . 
 
Sugar  – Heat 5 g with 1 ml of dilute sulphuric acid  for five minutes on a water-bath. Add 2 ml of dilute 
sodium hydroxide solution  and 1 ml of copper sulphate solution . A clear, blue coloured solution is 
produced. Continue heating on the water-bath for five minutes. The solution re mains blue and no 
precipitate is formed. 
 
Fatty acids and esters  –Mix 50 ml with 50 ml of freshly boiled water  and 50.0 ml of 0.5N sodium 
hydroxide,  boil the mixture for five minutes. Cool, add a few drops of phenolphthalein solution  and titrate 
the excess alkali with 0.5 N hydrochloric acid . Perform a blank determination, not more than 1 ml of 0.5 
N sodium hydroxide  is consumed. 
 
Sulphated ash  –Not more than 0.01 per cent, Appendix 2.2.6. 
 
Storage  – Store in tightly-closed containers. 
 
Glycerin Solution – Dilute 33 ml of glycerin  to 100 ml with water and add a small piece of camphor or 
liquid phenol. 
 
n- Hexane - C6H14 ,= 86.18 
Analytical reagent grade of commerce containing not less than 90.05 of n-Hexane. 
 
Colourless, mobile, highly flammable liquid, bp 68 0; wt per ml, about 0.674 g.  
 
Hydrochloric Acid – HCl = 36.46 
 
Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid 
 
Description   – Clear, colourless, fuming liquid; odour, pungent. 
 
Arsenic  – Not more than 1 part per million, Appendix 2.3.1. 
 
Heavy metals  – Not more than 5 parts per million, determined by Method A on a solution pr epared in the 
following manner : Evaporate 3.5 ml to dryness on a water-bath, add 2 ml of dilute acetic acid to the 
residue, and add water to make 25 ml, Appendix 2.3.3. 
  CCCLIV  Bromide and iodide  – Dilute 5 ml with 10 ml of water , add 1 ml of chloroform , and add drop by drop, with 
constant shaking, chlorinated lime solution ; the chloroform layer does not become brown or violet. 
 
Sulphite  – Dilute 1 ml with 10 ml of water, and add 5 drops of barium chloride solution and 0.5 ml of 
0.001 N iodine ; the colour of the iodine is not completely discharged. 
 
Sulphate  – To 5 ml add 10 mg of sodium bicarbonate and evaporate to dryness on a wate r bath; the 
residue, dissolved in water ; complies with the limit test for sulphates , Appendix. 2.3.7. 
 
Free chlorine – Dilute 5 ml with 10 ml of freshly boiled and cooled water , add 1 ml of cadmium  iodide 
solution , and shake with 1 ml of chloroform ; the chloroform layer does not become violet within one 
minute. 
 
Sulphated ash –Not more than 0.01 per cent, Appendix 2.2.6. 
 
Assay –Weigh accurately about 4 g into a stoppered flask containing 40 ml of w ater, and titrare with N 
sodium hydroxide , using methyl orange solution as indicator. Each ml of N sodium hydroxide is 
equivalent to 0.03646 g of HCl. 
 
Storage  – Store in glass-stoppered containers at a temperature not exceeding 30 0. 
 
Hydrochloric Acid, x N  –Solution of any normality x N may be prepared by diluting 84 x ml of hydrochloric acid 
to 1000 ml with water . 
 
                                        Hydrochloric Acid – (1 per cent w/v) Dilute 1 g of hydrochloric  acid to 100 ml with water. 
Dilute Hydrochloric Acid – 
 
                                                          Description   –Colourless liquid. 
Arsenic, Heavy metals bromoide and iodide, Sulphate , free chlorine  –Complies with the tests described under 
Hydrochloric Acid, when three times the quantity is taken for each test. 
 
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 10 g and carry out the Assay described under Hydrochloric Acid.  
 
Storage  –Store in stoppered containers of glass or other inert material, at temperature be low    30 0. 
 
Hydrochloric Acid, N – HCl = 36.460 
 
36.46 g in 1000 ml 
 
Dilute 85 ml of hydrochloric acid with water to 1000 ml and standardise the solution as follows : 
 
Weigh accurately about 1.5 g of anhydrous sodium carbonate, previously heated at about 270 0 for one 
hour. Dissolve it in 100 ml of water and add two drops of methyl red solution . Add the acid slowly from a 
burette with constant stirring, until the solution becomes faintly pink. Heat again to boiling and titrate  CCCLV  further as necessary until the faint pink colour no longer affected by  continued boiling. Each 0.5299 g of 
anhydrous sodium carbonate is equivalent to 1 ml of N hydrochloric acid. 
 
Hydrochloric Acid, Iron-Free  – Hydrochloric acid, which complies with the following additional test . 
Evaporate 5 ml on a water-bath nearly to dryness, add 40 ml of water, 2 ml of a 20 per cent w/v solution 
of citric acid and two drops of thioglycollic acid, mix, make alkali ne with dilute ammonia solution , and 
dilute to 50 ml with water; no pink colour is produced. 
   
Hydrogen Peroxide Solution  – (20 Vol.) H 2O2 = 34.02 
 
Analytical reagent grade of commerce or  hydrogen peroxide solution (100 Vol.) diluted with 4 volumes 
of water. 
 
A colourless liquid containing about 6 per cent w/v of H 2O2; weight per ml, about 1.02 g. 
 
Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride; Hydroxylammonium Chloride –  NH 2OH.HCl = 69.49. 
 
Contains not less than 97.0 per cent w/w of NH 2OH. HCI. 
 
Description  –Colourless crystals, or a white, crystalline powder. 
 
Solubility  –Very soluble in water; soluble in alcohol. 
 
Free acid –Dissolve 1.0 g in 50 ml of alcohol , add 3 drops of dimethyl yellow solution and titrate to the full 
yellow colour with N sodium hydroxide ; not more than 0.5 ml of N sodium hydroxide is required. 
 
Sulphated ash –Not more than 0.2 per cent, Appendix 2.2.6. 
 
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 0.1 g and dissolve in 20 ml of water, add 5 g of f erric ammonium sulphate 
dissolve in 20 ml of water, and 15 ml of dilute sulphuric acid , boil for five minutes, dilute with 200 ml of 
water, and titrate with 0.1 N potassium permanganate . Each ml of 0.1 N potassium permanganate is 
equivalent to 0.003475 g of NH 2OH. HCl. 
 
Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride Solution – Dissolve 1 g of  hydroxylamine hydrochloride in 50 ml of 
water and add 50 ml of alcohol,  1 ml of bromophenol blue solution and 0.1 N sodium hydroxide until the 
solution becomes green. 
 
Mercuric Chloride – HgCl 2  =271.50. 
 
Contains not less than 99.5 per cent of HgCl 2; 
 
Description   –Heavy, colourless or white, crystalline masses, or a white crystalline powder . 
 
Solubility  –Soluble in water ; freely soluble in alcohol . 
 
Non-volatile matter –When volatilised, leaves not more than 0.1 per cent of residue. 
  CCCLVI  Assay  –Weigh accurately about 0.3 g and dissolve in 85 ml of water in a stoppered-flask, add 10 ml of 
calcium chloride solution , 10 ml of potassium iodide solution , 3 ml of formaldehyde solution and 15 ml 
of sodium hydroxide solution , and shake continuously for two minutes. Add 20 ml of acetic acid and 35 
ml of 0.1  N iodine. Shake continuously for about ten minutes, or until the precipitated mercury  is 
completely redissolved, and titrate the excess of iodine with 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate . Each ml of 0.1 N 
iodine is  equivalent to 0.01357 g of HgCl 2. 
 
Mercuric Chloride, 0.2 M – Dissolve 54.30 g of mercuric chloride  in sufficient water to produce 1000 
ml. 
 
Mercuric Chloride Solution –A 5.0 per cent w/v solution of mercuric chloride  in water. 
 
Mercuric Potassium Iodide Solution  – See Potassium - Mercuric Iodide solution. 
 
Methyl Alcohol : Methanol : CH 3OH = 32.04. 
 
Description   –Clear, Colourless liquid with a characteristic odour. 
 
Solubility  –Miscible with water, forming a clear colourless liquid. 
 
Specific Gravity  – At 25 0, not more than 0.791. 
 
Distillation range   – Not less than 95 per cent distils between 64.5 0 and 65.5 0. 
 
Refractive Index  –At 20 0, 1.328 to 1.329. 
 
Acetone  –Place 1 ml in a Nessler cylinder , add 19 ml of water, 2 ml of a 1 per cent w/v solution of 2-
nitrobenzaldehyde  in alcohol (50 per cent) , 1 ml of 30 per cent w/v solution of sodium hydroxide and 
allow to stand in the dark for fifteen minutes. The colour developed does not  exceed that produced by 
mixing 1 ml of standard acetone solution, 19 ml of water, 2 ml of the s olution of 2-nitrobenzaldehyde  and 
1 ml of the solution of sodium hydroxide  and allowing to stand in the dark for fifteen minutes. 
 
Acidity  –To 5 ml add 5 ml of carbon dioxide-free water , and titrate with 0.1 N sodium hydroxide , using 
bromothymol blue solution as indicator; not more than 0.1 ml is required. 
 
Non-volatile matter  – When evaporated on a water-bath and dried to constant weight at 105º, lea ves not 
more than 0.005 per cent w/v of residue. 
 
Methyl Alcohol, Dehydrated  –Methyl alcohol, which complies with the following additional 
requirement.  
 
Water  –Not more than 0.1 per cent w/w. 
 
Methyl Orange – Sodium- p-di methylamineazobenzene sulphate, C 14 H14 O3N3SNa. 
  CCCLVII  An orange-yellow powder or crystalline scales, slightly soluble i n cold water; insoluble in alcohol; 
readily soluble in hot water. 
 
Methyl Orange Solution  –Dissolve 0.1 g of methyl orange in 80 ml of water and dilute to 100 ml with 
alcohol.  
 
Test for sensitivity  –A mixture of 0.1 ml of the methyl orange solution and 100 ml freshly boi led and 
cooled water is yellow. Not more than 0.1 ml of 0.1 N hydrochloric acid i s required to change the colour 
to red. 
 
Colour change  – pH 3.0 (red) to pH 4.4 (yellow). 
 
Methyl Red  – p-Dimethylaminoazobenzene-O-carboxylic acid, C 15 H15 O2N3. 
 
A dark red powder or violet crystals, sparingly soluble in water ; soluble in alcohol. 
 
Methyl red solution –Dissolve 100 mg in 1.86 ml of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide and 50 ml of alcohol and 
dilute to 100 ml with water. 
 
Test for sensitivity –A mixture of 0.1 ml of the methyl red solution and 100 ml of freshly boiled and cooled 
water to which 0.05 ml of 0.02  N hydrochloric acid  has been added is red. Not more than 0.01 ml of 0.02 
N sodium hydroxide is required to change the colour to yellow. 
 
Colour change  – pH 4.4 (red) to pH 6.0 (yellow). 
 
Molish’s Reagent –Prepare two solutions in separate bottles, with ground glass stoppers: 
 
(a) Dissolve 2 g of α-naphthol in 95 per cent alcohol and make upto 10 ml with alcohol ( α-naphthol can 
be replaced by thymol or resorcinol). Store in a place protected from  light. The solution can be used for 
only a short period. 
        
(b) Concentrated sulphuric acid . 
 
Nitric Acid  –Contains 70.0 per cent w/w of HNO 3 (limits, 69.0 to 71.0). About 16 N in strength. 
 
Description   –Clear, colourless, fuming liquid. 
 
Wt. per ml . – At 20 0, 1.41 to 1.42 g. 
 
Copper and Zinc –Dilute 1 ml with 20 ml of water, and add a slight excess of dilute  ammonia solution; the 
mixture does not become blue. Pass hydrogen sulphide; a precipitate is not produced. 
 
Iron  –0.5 ml of complies with the limit test for iron, Appendix 2.3.4. 
 
Lead  –Not more than 2 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.5. 
  CCCLVIII  Chloride  –5 ml neutralised with dilute ammonia solution, complies with the lim it test for chlorides, 
Appendix 2.3.2. 
 
Sulphates  –To 2.5 ml add 10 mg of sodium bicarbonate and evaporate to dryness on a water -bath, the 
residue dissolved in water, complies with the limit test for sulphates, Appendix 2.3.7. 
 
Sulphated ash  – Not more than 0.01 per cent w/w, Appendix 2.2.6. 
 
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 4 g into a stoppered flask containing 40 ml of w ater, and titrate with N 
Sodium hydroxide, using methyl orange solution as indicator. Each ml of N sodium hydroxide is 
equivalent to 0.06301 g of HNO 3. 
 
Nitric Acid, x N –Solutions of any normality XN may be prepared by diluting 63x ml of nit ric acid to 
1000 ml with water. 
 
Nitric Acid, Dilute –Contains approximately 10 per cent w/w of HNO 3. Dilute 106 ml of nitric acid to 
1000 ml with water. 
 
Petroleum  Light – Petroleum Spirit. 
 
Description  – Colourless, very volatile, highly flammable liquid obtained from petr oleum, consisting of a 
mixture of the lower members of the paraffin series of hydrocarbons  and complying with one or other of 
the following definitions : 
 
Light Petroleum  –(Boiling range, 30 0 to 40 0).  
 
Wt. per ml.  –At 20 0, 0.620 to 0.630 g. 
 
Light Petroleum  –(Boiling range, 40 0 to 60 0).  
 
Wt. per ml  –At 20 0, 0.630 to 0.650 g. 
 
Light Petroleum  –(Boiling range, 60 0 to 80 0). 
 
Wt. per ml . –At 20 0, 0.670 to 0.690. 
 
Light Petroleum  –(Boiling range, 80 0 to 100 0).  
 
Wt. per ml . –At 20 0, 0.700 to 0.720 
 
Light Petroleum  –(Boiling range, 100 0 to 120 0). 
 
Wt. per ml  –At 20 0, 0.720 to 0.740 g.  
 
Light Petroleum  –(Boiling range, 120 0 to 160 0). 
  CCCLIX  Wt. per ml  –At 20 0, about 0.75 g. 
 
Non-volatile matter  –When evaporated on a water-bath and dried at 105 0, leaves not more than 0.002 per 
cent w/v of residue. 
 
Patterns & Reeders indicators 0.1per cent  solution  – Dissolve 0.01g indicator in 100 ml of Methanol. 
 
Phenolphthalein  –C 20 H14 O4. 
 
A white to yellowish-white powder, practically insoluble in water, soluble in alcohol . 
 
Phenolpthalein indicator  – Dissolve 0.5 gm Phenolpthalein in 100 ml of 
50% ethyl alcohol (v/v). 
 
 
Phenolphthalein Solution  –Dissolve 0.10 g in 80 ml of alcohol and dilute to 100 ml with water. 
 
Test for sensitivity  –To 0.1 ml of the phenolphthalein solution  add 100 ml of freshly boiled and cooled 
water, the solution is colourless. Not more than 0.2 ml of 0.02  N sodium hydroxide is required to change 
the colour to pink. 
 
Colour change  – pH 8.2 (colourless) to pH 10.0 (red) 
 
Phloroglucinol – 1 , 3 , 5 – Trihydroxybenzene , C 6H3(OH) 3 . 2H 2O. 
 
Description   – White or yellowish crystals or a crystalline powder. 
 
Solubility  –Slightly soluble in water; soluble in alcohol , and in solvent ether . 
 
Melting range  –After drying at 110 0 for one hour, 215 0 to 219 0. 
 
Sulphated ash  – Not more than 0.1 per cent, Appendix 2.2.6. 
 
Phloroglucinol should be kept protected from light. 
 
Phosphoric Acid – H 3PO 4 = 98.00. 
 
(Orthophosphoric Acid; Concentrated Phosphoric Acid). 
 
Description   –Clear and colourless syrupy liquid, corrosive. 
 
Solubility  –Miscible with water and with alcohol. 
 
Phosphoric Acid, x N – 
 
Solutions of any normality, x N may be prepared by diluting 49 x g of phosphoric acid with water to 
1000 ml.  CCCLX   
Phosphoric Acid, Dilute – 
 
Contains approximately 10 per cent w/v of H 3PO 4. 
 
Dilute 69 ml of phosphoric acid to 1000 ml with water. 
 
Potassium Chloride – KCl = 74.55  
 
Analytical reagent grade 
 
Potassium Chromate – K2CrO 4 = 194.2 
 
Analytical reagent grade 
 
Potassium Chromate Solution – A 5.0 per cent w/v solution of potassium chromate. 
 
Gives a red precipitate with silver nitrate in neutral solutions. 
 
Potassium Cupric-Tartrate Solution – Cupric Tatrate Alkaline Solution: Fehling’s Solution.  
 
(1) Copper Solution  – Dissolve 34.66 g of carefully selected small crystals of copper sulphate, showing no 
trace of efflorescence or of adhering moisture, in sufficient wat er to make 500 ml. Keep this solution in 
small, well-stoppered bottles. 
 
(2) Alkaline Tartrate Solution  – Dissolve 176 g of sodium potassium tartrate and 77 g of sodium 
hydroxide in sufficient water to produce 500 ml. 
 
Mix equal volumes of the solutions No. 1 and No. 2 at the time of using. 
 
Potassium Dichromate –  K 2Cr 2O7 =294.18. 
 
Contains not less than 99.8 per cent of K 2Cr 2O7. 
  
Description   – Orange-red crystals or a crystalline powder. 
 
Solubility  – Soluble in water  
 
Chloride  –To 20 ml of a 5 per cent w/v solution in water and 10 ml nitric acid, warm to about 50 0and add a few 
drops of silver nitrate solution ; not more than a faint opalescence is produced.  
 
Assay  –Carry out the assay described under Potassium Chromate, using 2 g. E ach ml of 0.1  N sodium thiosulphate 
is equivalent to 0.004904 g of K 2Cr 2O7. 
 
Potassium Dichromate Solution – A 7.0 per cent w/v solution of potassium dichromate in water. 
 
Potassium Dichromate, Solution 0.1N –  K 2Cr 2O7 = 294.18, 4.903 g in 1000 ml. 
 
Weigh accurately 4.903 g of potassium dichromate and dissolve in sufficient water to produce 1000 ml. 
  CCCLXI  Potassium Dihydrogen Phosphate - KH 2PO 4 = 136.1 
 
Analytical reagent grade of commerce. 
 
Potassium Ferrocyanide –  K 4Fe(CN) 6.3H 2O =422.39. 
 
Contains not less than 99.0 per cent of K 4Fe(CN) 6.3H 2O. 
  
Description   –Yellow, crystalline powder. 
 
Solubility  –Soluble in water. 
 
Acidity or Alkalinity  –A 10 per cent w/v solution in water is neutral to litmus paper. 
 
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 1g and dissolve in 200 ml of water, add 10 ml of sulphuric acid and  titrate with 0.1  
N potassium permanganate. Each ml of 0.1  N potassium permanganate is equivalent to 0.04224 g of K 4Fe (CN) 6. 
3H 2O. 
 
Potassium Ferrocyanide Solution  –A 5.0 per cent w/v solution of potassium ferrocyanide in water.  
 
Potassium Hydrogen Phthalate – CO 2H. C 6H4. CO 2K =204.22. 
 
Contains not less than 99.9 per cent and not more than the equivalent of 100.1 per cent of C 8H5O4K calculated with 
reference to the substance dried at 110 0 for one hour. 
 
Description   –White, crystalline powder. 
 
Solubility  –Slowly soluble in water,  forming clear, colourless solution. 
 
Acidity –A 2.0 per cent w/v solution in carbon dioxide free water gives with bromophenol blue solution the grey 
colour indicative of pH 4.0. 
 
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 9 g, dissolve in 100 ml of water and titrate with  N sodium hydroxide using 
phenolphthalein solution as indicator. Each ml of  N Sodium hydroxide  is equivalent to 0.2042 g of 
C8H5O4K. 
 
Potassium Hydrogen Phthalate, 0.02 M – Dissolve 4.084 g of Potassium hydrogen phthalate in 
sufficient water to produce 1000 ml. 
 
Potassium Hydrogen Phthalate, 0.2 M – Dissolve 40.84 g of potassium hydrogen phthalate in 
sufficient water  to produce 1000 ml. 
 
Potassium Hydroxide – Caustic Potash : KOH = 56.11 
   
Contains not less than 85.0 per cent of total alkali, calculated as KOH and not more than 4.0 per c ent of K 2CO 3. 
 
Description  – Dry white sticks, pellets or fused mass; hard, brittle and showing  a crystalline fracture; very 
deliquescent; strongly alkaline and corrosive. 
 
Solubility  –Freely soluble in water, in alcohol and in glycerin; very soluble in boiling ethyl alcohol .  CCCLXII   
Aluminium, iron and matter insoluble in hydrochlori c acid  –Boil 5 g with 40 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid , 
cool, make alkaline with dilute ammonia solution, boil, filter and wash the residue with a 2.5 pe r cent w/v 
solution of ammonium nitrate; the insoluble residue, after ignition to constant weight, w eighs not more 
than 5 mg. 
 
Chloride  –0.5 g dissolved in water with the additon of 1.6 ml of nitric acid, compl ies with the limit test for 
chlorides, Appendix 2.3.2. 
 
Heavy metals  –Dissolve 1 g in a mixture of 5 ml of water and 7 ml of dilute hydroc hloric acid. Heat to boiling, add 
1 drop of phenolphthalein solution and dilute ammonia solution dropwise to produce a f aint pink colour. Add 2 ml 
of acetic acid and water to make 25 ml; the limit of heavy metals is 30 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.3. 
 
Sulphate  –Dissolve 1 g in water with the addition of 4.5 ml of hydrochloric acid;  the solution complies with the 
limit test for sulphates, Appendix 2.3.6. 
 
Sodium  –To 3 ml of a 10 per cent w/v solution add 1 ml of water, 1.5 ml of alcohol , and 3 ml of potassium 
antimonate solution and allow to stand; no white crystalline precipita te or sediment is visible to the naked eye 
within fifteen minutes. 
 
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 2 g, and dissolve in 25 ml of water, add 5 ml of barium chloride solution, and 
titrate with N hydrochloric acid, using phenolphthalein solution as indicat or. To the solution in the flask add 
bromophenol blue solution, and continue the titration with N hydrochloric acid. Ea ch ml of N hydrochloric acid, 
used in the second titration in equivalent to 0.06911 g of K 2CO 3 . Each ml of N hydrochloric acid, used in the 
combined titration is equivalent to 0.05611 g of total alkali, calculated as KOH. 
 
Storage  –Potassium Hydroxide should be kept in a well-closed container. 
 
Potassium Hydroxide, x N  – Solution of any normality, x N, may be prepared by dissolving 56.11x g of potassium 
hydroxide in water and diluting to 1000 ml. 
 
Potassium Hydroxide Solution  –Solution of Potash. 
 
An aqueous solution of potassium hydroxide containing 5.0 per cent w/v of total alkali, calculated as KOH (limits, 
4.75 to 5.25). 
 
Assay  –Titrate 20 ml with N sulphuric acid, using solution of methyl orange a s indicator. Each ml of N sulphuric 
acid is equivalent to 0.05611 g of total alkali, calculated as KOH. 
 
Storage  –Potassium hydroxide solution should be kept in a well-closed container of lead-free glass or of a suitable 
plastic. 
 
Potassium Iodide  –KI = 166.00 
 
Description  – Colourless crystals or white powder; odourless, taste, saline and slightly bitte r. 
 
Solubility  –Very soluble in water and in glycerin; soluble in alcohol. 
 
Arsenic –Not more than 2 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.1. 
  CCCLXIII  Heavy metals  -Not more than 10 parts per million, determined on 2.0 g by Method A, Appendix 2.3.3. 
 
Barium –Dissolve 0.5 g in 10 ml of water and add 1 ml of dilute sulphuric acid; no turbidity develops within one 
minute. 
 
Cyanides  –Dissolve 0.5 g in 5 ml of warm water, add one drop of ferrous sulphate s olution and 0.5 ml of sodium 
hydroxide solution and acidify with hydrochloric acid; no blue colour is produced. 
 
Iodates  –Dissolve 0.5 g in 10 ml of freshly boiled and cooled water, and add 2 drops of  dilute sulphuric acid and a 
drop of starch solution; no blue colour is produced within two minutes. 
 
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 0.5 g, dissolve in about 10 ml of water and add 35 ml of hydrochloric a cid and 5 ml 
of chloroform. Titrate with 0.05 M potassium iodate until the purple colour of iodine disappears from the 
chloroform. Add the last portion of the iodate solution drop-wise and agitate v igorously and continuously. Allow to 
stand for five minutes. If any colour develops in the chloroform layer  continue the titration. Each ml of 0.05 M 
potassium iodate is equivalent to 0.0166 mg of KI. 
 
Storage  –Store in well-closed containers. 
 
Potassium Iodide, M  –Dissolve 166.00 g of potassium iodide in sufficient water to produce 1000 ml.  
 
Potassium Iodide and Starch Solution  –Dissolve 10 g of potassium iodide in sufficient water to produce 95 ml  
and add 5 ml of starch solution. 
 
Potassium Iodide and Starch solution must be recently prepared. 
 
Potassium Iodide Solution  –A 10 per cent w/v solution of potassium iodide in water. 
 
Potassium Iodobismuthate Solution  –Dissolve 100 g of tartaric acid in 400 ml of water and 8.5 g of bism uth 
oxynitrate. Shake during one hour, add 200 ml of a 40 per cent w/v 
 
Potassium Iodobismuthate Solution, Dilute  –Dissolve 100 g of tartaric acid in 500 ml of water and add 50 ml of 
potassium iodobismuthate solution. 
 
Potassium Mercuric-Iodide Solution  –Mayer’s Reagent. 
 
Add 1.36 g of mercuric chloride dissolved in 60 ml of water to a solution of 5 g of potassium iodide in 20 ml of 
water, mix and add sufficient water to produce 100 ml. 
 
Potassium Mercuric-Iodide Solution, Alkaline (Nessler’s Reagent) 
 
To 3.5 g of potassium iodide add 1.25 g of mercuric chloride dissolved in 80 ml  of water, add a cold saturated 
solution of mercuric chloride in water, with constant stirring until a slight red precipitate remains. Dissolve 12 g of 
sodium hydroxide in the solution, add a little more of the cold saturated s olution of mercuric chloride and sufficient 
water to produce 100 ml. Allow to stand and decant the clear liquid.  
   
Potassium Permanganate  – KMnO 4 = 158.03 
 
Description   –Dark purple, slender, prismatic crystals, having a metallic lust re, odourless; taste, sweet and 
astringent.  CCCLXIV   
Solubility  –Soluble in water ; freely soluble in boiling water. 
 
Chloride and Sulphate –Dissolve 1 g in 50 ml of boiling water , heat on a water-bath, and add gradually 4 ml 
or a sufficient quantity of alcohol until the meniscus is colour-less; filter. A 20 ml portion of the fi ltrate 
complies with the limit test for chloride, Appendix 2.3.2., and another 20 ml portion of the filtrate 
complies with the limit test for  sulphates, Appendix 2.3.7. 
 
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 0.8 g, dissolve in water and dilute to 250 ml. Tit rate with this solution 
25.0 ml of 0.1  N oxalic acid mixed with 25 ml of  water and 5 ml of sulphuric acid. Keep the temperature 
at about 70 0 throughout the entire titration. Each ml of 0.1  N oxalic acid is equivalent to 0.00316 g of 
KMnO 4. 
 
Storage  –Store in well-closed containers. 
 
Caution  –Great care should be observed in handling potassium permanganate , as dangerous explosions 
are liable to occur if it is brought into contact with organic or ot her readily oxidisable substance, either in 
solution or in the dry condition. 
 
Potassium Permanganate Solution  – A 1.0 per cent w/v solution of potassium permanganate  in water. 
 
Potassium Permanganate, 0.1 N Solution  –158.03. 3.161 g in 1000 ml 
 
Dissolve about 3.3. g of potassium permanganate  in 1000 ml of water , heat on a water-bath for one hour 
and allow to stand for two days. Filter through glass wool and standardise the solution as fol lows : 
 
To an accurately measured volume of about 25 ml of the solution in a gla ss stoppered flask add 2 g of 
potassium iodide followed by 10 ml of N sulphuric acid. Titrate the liberated iodine with standardised 0.1 
N sodium thiosulphate, adding 3 ml of starch solution  as the end point is approached. Correct for a blank 
run on the same quantities of the same reagents. Each ml of 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate is equivalent to 
0.003161 g of KMnO 4. 
 
Potassium Tellurite: K2 TeO 3 (approx) 
General reagent grade of commerce. 
 
Purified Water  –H 2O = 18.02. 
 
Description   –Clear, colourless liquid, odourless, tasteless. 
 
Purified water is prepareed from potable water by distillation, i on-exchange treatment, reverse osmosis or 
any other suitable process. It contains no added substances. 
 
pH  – Between 4.5 and 7.0 determined in a solution prepared by adding 0.3 ml of a s aturated solution of 
potassium chloride to 100 ml of the liquid being examined. 
 
Carbon dioxide –To 25 ml add 25 ml of calcium hydroxide solution , no turbidity is produced.  CCCLXV   
Chloride  –To 10 ml add 1 ml of dilute nitric acid and 0.2 ml of silver nitrate solution; no opalescence is 
produced, Appendix 2.3.2. 
 
Sulphate  –To 10 ml add 0.1 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid and 0.1 ml of barium chloride, the solution 
remains clear for an hour, Appendix 2.3.6. 
 
Nitrates and Nitrites –To 50 ml add 18 ml of acetic acid and 2 ml of naphthylamine-sulphanilic acid 
reagent. Add 0.12 g of zinc reducing mixture and shake several times. No pink colour develops within 
fifteen minutes. 
 
Ammonium – To 20 ml add 1 ml of alkaline potassium mercuric-iodide solution and after five minutes 
view in a Nessler cylinder placed on a white tile; the colour is  not more intense than that given on adding 
1 ml of alkaline potassium mercuric-iodide solution to a solution containing 2.5 ml of dilute ammonium 
chloride solution (Nessler’s)  7.5 ml of the liquid being examined. 
 
Calcium  –To 10 ml add 0.2 ml of dilute ammonia solution and 0.2 ml of ammonium oxalate solution; the 
solution remains clear for an hour. 
 
Heavy metals –Adjust the pH of 40 ml to between 3.0 and 4.0 with dilute acetic acid, add 10 ml of freshly 
prepared hydrogen sulphide solution and allow to stand for ten minutes; the colour of the solution is not 
more than that of a mixture of 50 ml of the liquid being examined and t he same amount of dilute acetic 
acid added  to the sample, Appendix 2.3.3. 
 
Oxidisable matter –To 100 ml add 10 ml of dilute sulphuric acid and 0.1 ml of 0.1 N potassium 
permanganate and boil for five minutes. The solution remains faintly pink. 
 
Total Solids –Not more than 0.001 per cent w/v determined on 100 ml by evaporating on a wate r bath and 
drying in an oven at 105 0 for one hour. 
 
Storage  –Store in tightly closed containers. 
 
Resorcinol solution  – Dissolve 1 g resublimed resorcinol in 100 ml hydrochloric acid (sp gr 1.18 to 1.19 ). 
 
Silver Nitrate Solution – A freshly prepared 5.0 per cent w/v solution of silver nitrate in water. 
 
Silver Nitrate, 0.1 N – AgNO 3 = 169. 87; 16.99 g in 1000 ml. Dissolve about 17 g in sufficient water to 
produce 1000 ml and standardise the solution as follows: 
 
Weigh accurately about 0.1 g of sodium chloride previously dried at 110 0 for two hours and dissolve in 5 
ml of water . Add 5 ml of acetic acid , 50 ml of methyl alcohol  and three drops of eosin solution is 
equivalent to 1 ml of 0.1 N silver nitrate. 
 
Sodium Bicarbonate  – NaHCO 3 =84.01 
 
Description   –White, crystalline powder or small, opaque, monoclinic crystals; odourless; taste , saline. 
  CCCLXVI  Solubility –Freely soluble in water ; practically insoluble in alcohol.  
Carbonate  –pH of a freshly prepared 5.0 per cent w/v solution in carbon dioxide-free water,  not more 
than 8.6. 
 
Aluminium, calcium and insoluble matter  –Boil 10 g with 50 ml of water and 20 ml of dilute ammonia 
solution, filter, and wash the residue with water; the residue, after igni tion to constant weight, not more 
than 1 mg. 
 
Arsenic  –Not more than 2 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.1. 
 
Iron –Dissolve 2.5 g in 20 ml of water and 4 ml of iron-free hydrochloric acid, and  dilute to 40 ml with 
water ; the solution complies with the limit test for iron, Appendix 2.3.4. 
 
Heavy metals –Not more than 5 parts per million, determined by Method A on a solution pre pared in the 
following manner: 
 
Mix 4.0 g with 5 ml of water  and 10 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid, heat to boiling, and maintain the 
temperature for one minute. Add one drop of phenolphthalein solution and sufficient ammonia solution 
drop wise to give the solution a faint pink colour. Cool and dilute to 25 ml with water, Appendix 2.3.3.  
 
Chlorides  –Dissolve 1.0 g in water  with the addition of 2 ml of nitric acid; the solution complies with the 
limit test for chlorides, Appendix 2.3.2.  
 
Sulphates –Dissolve 2 g in water  with the addition of 2 ml of hydrochloric acid; the solution complies 
with the limit test for sulphates, Appendix 2.3.6. 
 
Ammonium compounds  –1 g warmed with 10 ml of sodium hydroxide solution does not evolve ammonia.  
 
Assay –Weigh accurately about 1 g, dissolve in 20 ml of water, and titrate with 0.5 N sulphuric acid using 
methyl orange solutions as indicator. Each ml of 0.5 N sulphuric acid is equivalent to 0.042 g of 
NaHCO 3. 
 
Storage  –Store in well-closed containers. 
 
Sodium Bicarbonate Solution  –A 5 per cnet w/v solution of sodium bicarbonate in water. 
 
Sodium Carbonate  – Na 2CO 3. 10H 2O =286.2. 
 
Analytical reagent grade. 
 
Sodium Chloride  – NaCl = 58.44 
 
Analytical reagent grade. 
 
Sodium Chloride Solution:  Dissolve 5 g of sodium chloride  in 50 ml of purified water. 
 
Sodium Hydroxide  –NaOH = 40.00  CCCLXVII   
Description   –White sticks, pellets, fused masses, or scales; dry, hard brittl e and showing a crystalline 
fracture, very deliquescent; strongly alkaline and corrosive. 
 
Solubility  –Freely soluble in water  and in alcohol. 
 
Aluminium, iron and matter insoluble in hydrochlori c acid  –Boil 5 g with 50 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid, 
cool, make alkaline with dilute ammonia solution, boil, filter, and wash with a 2.5 per cent w/v solution 
of ammonium nitrate; the insoluble residue after ignition to constant weight weighs not more than 5 mg. 
 
Arsenic  –Not more than 4 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.1. 
 
Heavy metals –Not more than 30 parts per million, determined by Method A, Appendix 2.3.3. in a solution 
prepared by dissolving 0.67 g in 5 ml of water and 7 ml of 3 N hydrochloric acid. Heat to boiling, cool 
and dilute to 25 ml with water. 
 
Potassium  –Acidify 5 ml of a 5 per cent w/v solution with acetic acid and add 3 drops of sodium 
cobaltnitrite solution; no preciptitate is formed. 
 
Chloride – 0.5 g dissolved in water  with the addition of 1.8 ml of nitric acid, complies with the limit test 
for chlorides, Appendix 2.3.2. 
  
Sulphates  –1 g dissolved in water with the addition of 3.5 ml of hydrochloric acid  complies with the limit 
test for sulphates, Appendix 2.3.6. 
 
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 1.5 g and dissolve in about 40 ml of carbon dioxide-free water. Cool and 
titrate with N sulphuric acid using phenolphthalein solution as indicator. When the pink colour of the 
solution is discharged, record the volume of acid solution required, add methyl orange solution and 
continue the titration until a persistent pink colour is produced. Each ml of N sulphuric acid is equivalent 
to 0.040 g of total alkali calculated as NaOH and each ml of acid c onsumed in the titration with methyl 
orange is equivalent to 0.106 g of Na 2CO 3.  
 
Storage  –Store in tightly closed containers. 
 
Sodium Hydroxide, x N  – Solutions of any normality, xN may be prepared by dissolving 40 x g of  
sodium hydroxide in water  and diluting to 1000 ml. 
 
Sodium  Hydroxide  Solution  – A 20.0 per cent w/v solution of sodium hydroxide  in water. 
 
Sodium  Hydroxide  Solution , Dilute – 
 
A 5.0 per cent w/v solution of sodium hydroxide in water. 
 
Sodium Potassium Tartrate  –Rochelle Salt COONa.CH(OH). CH(OH), COOK. 4H 2O = 282.17 
  CCCLXVIII  Contains not less than 99.0 per cent and not more than the equivalent of 104.0 per cent of C 4H4O6KNa. 
4H 2O. 
 
Description  –Colourless crystals or a white, crystalline powder; odourless; ta ste saline and cooling. It 
effloresces slightly in warm, dry air, the crystals are often coated with a  white powder. 
 
Solubility  –Soluble in water; practically insoluble in alcohol. 
 
Acidity or Alkalinity –Dissolve 1 g in 10 ml of recently boiled and cooled water, the solution requires for 
neutralisation not more than 0.1 ml of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide or of 0.1 N hydrochloric acid, using 
phenolphthalein solution as indicator.  
 
Iron –0.5 g complies with the limit test for iron, Appendix 2.3.4. 
 
Chloride  –0.5 g complies with the limit test for chlorides, Appendix 2.3.2. 
 
Sulphate  –0.5 g complies with the limit test for sulphate,  Appendix 2.3.6. 
 
Assay –Weigh accurately about 2 g and heat until carbonised, cool, and boil the re sidue with 50 ml of 
water  and 50 ml of 0.5 N sulphuric acid; filter, and wash the filter with water; titrate the excess of acid in 
the filtrate and washings with 0.5 N sodium hydroxide,  using methyl orange solution as indicator. Each 
ml of 0.5 N sulphuric acid is equivalent to 0.07056 g of C 4H4O6KNa. 4H 2O. 
 
Sodium Sulphate (anhydrous) – Na 2SO 4 = 142.04 
 
Analytical reagent grade of commerce. 
White, crystalline powder of granules; hygroscopic. 
 
Sodium Thiosulphate  – Na 2S2O3. 5H 2O =248.17. 
 
Description  – Large colourless crystals or coarse, crystalline powder; odourle ss; taste, saline, deliquescent 
in moist air and effloresces in dry air at temperature above 33 0. 
 
Solubility  – Very soluble in water ; insoluble in alcohol. 
 
pH  –Between 6.0 and 8.4, determined in a 10 per cent w/v solution. 
 
Arsenic  –Not more than 2 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.1. 
 
Heavy metals  –Not more than 20 parts per million, determined by Method A, Appendix 2.3.3. in a  solution 
prepared in the following manner : Dissolve 1 g in 10 ml of water, slowly add 5 ml of dilute hydrochloric 
acid and evaporate the mixture to dryness on a water-bath. Gently boil the r esidue with 15 ml of water  for 
two minutes, and filter. Heat the filtrate to boiling, and add suffic ient  bromine solution to the hot filtrate 
to produce a clear solution and add a slight excess of bromine solution. Boil the solution to expel the 
bromine completely, cool to room temperature, then add a drop of phenolphthalein solution and sodium  CCCLXIX  hydroxide solution until a slight pink colour is produced. Add 2 ml of dilute acetic acid and dilute with 
water to 25 ml.  
 
Calcium  –Dissolve 1 g in 20 ml of water,  and add a few ml of ammonium oxalate solution; no turbidity is 
produced. 
 
Chloride –Dissolve 0.25 g in 15 ml of 2N nitric acid and boil gently for three to four minutes, cool and 
filter; the filtrate complies with the limit test for chlorides, Appendix 2.3.2. 
 
Sulphate and Sulphite –Dissolve 0.25 g in 10 ml of water , to 3 ml of this solution add 2 ml of iodine 
solution, and gradually add more  iodine solution , dropwise until a very faint-persistant yellow colour is 
procduced; the resulting solution complies with the limit test for sulphates, Appendix 2.3.7.  
 
Sulphide  –Dissolve 1 g in 10 ml of water  and 10.00 ml of a freshly prepared 5 per cent w/v solution of 
sodium nitroprusside; the solution does not become violet. 
 
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 0.8 g and dissolve in 30 ml of water. Titrate with 0.1 N iodine, using 3 ml 
of starch solution as indicator as the end-point is approached. Each ml of 0.1 iodine is equival ent to 
0.02482 g of Na 2S2O3.5H 2O. 
 
Storage  –Store in tightly-closed containers. 
 
Sodium Thiosulphate, 0.1 N  – Na 2S2O3.5H 2O. = 248.17, 24.82 g in 1000 ml. 
 
Dissolve about 26 g of sodium thiosulphate and 0.2 g of sodium carbonate in carbon dioxide-free water 
and dilute to 1000 ml with the same solvent. Standardise the solution as follows : 
 
Dissolve 0.300 g of potassium bromate in sufficient water  to produce 250 ml. To 50 ml of this solution, 
add 2 g of potassium iodide and 3 ml of 2 N hydrochloric acid and titrate with the sodium-thiosulphate 
solution using starch solution, added towards the end of the titration, as indicator until the blue colour is 
discharged. Each 0.002784 g of potassium bromate is equivalent to 1 ml of 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate. 
Note: –Re-standardise 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate frequently . 
 
Soxhlet Modification of Fehling’s solution  – Prepare by mixing equal volumes of Solution A and Solution B 
immediately before using. 
 
Copper Sulphate Solution (Solution A)  – Dissolve 34.639 g of copper sulphate crystals  (CuSO 4.5H 2O)in water, 
dilute to 500ml and filter through glass wool or filter paper. 
 
Potassium Sodium Tartrate (Rochelle Salt) Solution (Solution B)  – Dissolve 173 g of potassium sodium tartrate and 
50 g of sodium hydroxide in water, dilute to 500 ml. Let the solution stand for a day and filter. 
 
Standard Invert Sugar Solution  – Weigh accurately 0.95 g sucrose and dissolve it in 500 ml water. A dd 2 ml of 
concentrated hydrochloric acid, boil gently for 30 minutes and keep aside for 24 hours. Neutralize with sodium 
carbonate and make the final volume to 1000 ml; 50 ml of this solution contains 0.05 g invert sugar.  
 
Stannous Chloride  – SnCl 2.  2H 2O =225.63.  CCCLXX   
Contains not less than 97.0 per cent of SnCl 2.  2H 2O. 
 
Description   –Colourless crystals. 
 
Solubility  –Soluble in dilute hydrochloric acid. 
 
Arsenic - Dissolve 5.0 g in 10 ml of hydrochloric acid, heat to boiling and allow to stand for one hour; the 
solution shows no darkening when compared with a freshly prepared solution of 5.0 g in 10 ml of 
hydrochloric acid. 
 
Sulphate –5.0 g with the addition of 2 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid , complies with the limit test for 
sulphates, Appendix 2.3.7. 
 
Assay –Weigh accurately about 1.0 g and dissolve in 30 ml of hydrochloric acid  in a stoppered flask. Add 
20 ml of water  and 5 ml of chloroform and titrate rapidly with 0.05 M potassium iodate until the  
chloroform layer is colourless. Each ml of 0.05 M potassium iodate is equivalent to 0.02256 g of SnCl 2. 
2H 2O. 
 
Stannous Chloride Solution  – May be prepared by either of the two methods given below : 
Dissolve 330 g of stannous  chloride in 100 ml of hydrochloric acid and add sufficient water  to produce 
1000 ml. 
 
Dilute 60 ml of hydrochloric acid with 20 ml of water , add 20 g of tin and heat gently until gas ceases to 
be evolved; add sufficient water to produce 100 ml, allowing the undissolved tin to remain in the 
solution. 
 
Starch Soluble  – Starch, which has been treated with hydrochloric acid until after being washed, it forms 
an almost clear liquid solution in hot water. 
 
Description   –Fine, white powder. 
 
Solubility  –Soluble in hot water, usually forming a slightly turbid solution . 
 
Acidity or Alkalinity –Shake 2 g with 20 ml of water  for three minutes and filter; the filtrate is not alkaline 
or more than fainthy acid to litmus paper. 
 
Sensitivity  –Mix 1 g with a little cold water  and add 200 ml boiling water. Add 5 ml of this solution to 100 
ml of water  and add 0.05 ml of 0.1 N  iodine. The deep blue colour is discharged by 0.05 ml of 0.1 N  
sodium thiosulphate. 
 
Ash  – Not more than 0.3 per cent, Appendix 2.3. 
 
Starch Solution –Triturate 0.5 g of soluble starch, with 5 ml of water,  and add this, with constant 
stirring, to sufficient water to produce about 100 ml. Boil for a few minutes, cool, and filte r. 
  CCCLXXI  Solution of starch must be recently prepared . 
 
Sulphamic Acid  –NH 2SO 3H =97.09. 
 
Contains not less than 98.0 per cent of H 3NO 3S. 
 
Description    -White crystals or a white crystalline powder. 
 
Solubility  –Readily soluble in water. Melting Range –203 0 to 205 0, with decomposition. 
 
Sulphuric Acid  – H 2SO 4 = 98.08.  
 
When no molarity is indicated use analytical reagent grade of com merce containing about 98 per cent 
w/w of sulphuric acid. An oily, corrosive liquid weighing about 1.84 g per ml and about 18 M in 
strength. 
 
When solutions of molarity xM are required, they should be prepared by ca refully adding 54 ml of 
sulphuric acid to an equal volume of water and diluting with water to 1000 ml. 
  
Solutions of sulphuric acid contain about 10 per cent w/v of H 2SO 4 per g mol. 
 
Sulphuric Acid, Dilute  –Contains approximately 10 per cent w/w of H 2SO 4. 
 
Dilute 57 ml of sulphuric acid to 1000 ml with water. 
 
Sulphuric Acid, Chlorine-free  –Sulphuric acid which complies with the following additional test: 
 
Chloride  –Mix 2 ml with 50 ml of water and add 1 ml of solution of silver nitrate,  no opalescence is 
produced .  
 
Sulphuric Acid, Nitrogen-free -Sulphuric acid which contains not less than 98.0 per cent w/w of H 2SO 4 
and complies with the following additional test : 
 
Nitrate  –Mix 45 ml with 5 ml of water , cool and add 8 mg of diphenyl benezidine;  the solution is 
colourless or not more than very pale blue. 
 
Sulphuric acid + orthophosphoric acid mixture  – take 60 ml water, add 15 ml conc. sulphuric acid   and 15 ml 
H3PO 4 cool and dilute to 1000ml. 
 
Tartaric Acid  –(CHOH. COOH) 2 =150.1 
 
Analytical reagent grade. 
 
Thioglycollic Acid  – Mercapto acetic acid, – HS. CH 2COOH =92.11. 
 
Contains not less than 89.0 per cent w/w of C 2H4O2S, as determined by both parts of the Assay described 
below :  CCCLXXII   
Description   –Colourless or nearly colourless liquid; odour strong and upleasant. 
 
Iron  –Mix 0.1 ml with 50 ml of water and render alkaline with strong ammonia solution; no pink colour 
is produced. 
 
Assay  – Weigh accurately about 0.4 g and dissolve in 20 ml of water and titrate with 0.1 N sodium 
hydroxide using cresol red solution as indicator. Each ml of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide is equivalent to 
0.009212 g of C 2H4O2S. 
 
To the above neutralised solution and 2 g of sodium bicarbonate and titrate with 0.1 N iodine. Each ml of 
0.1 N iodine is equivalent to 0.009212 g of  C2H4O2S. 
 
Triethanolamine 20per cent Solution  – 200 ml of triethanolamine, adds 800 ml water and make up to 1000 ml. 
 
Toluene - Methyl benzene,C 6H5.CH 3 =102.14. 
 
Analytical grade reagent of commerce. 
Clear, colourless liquid, odour, characteristic; bp about 110 0, wt per ml, about 0.870 g. 
 
Water –See purified water. 
 
Water, Ammonia-free  –Water, which has been boiled vigorously for a few minutes and protecte d from 
the atomosphere during cooling and storage. 
 
Xylenol Orange  – [3H-2,1-Benzoxathiol–3-ylidene bis – (6-hydroxy-5-methyl-m-phenylene) 
methylenenitrilo] tetra acetic acid SS-dioxide or its tetra sodium salt.  
 
Gives a reddish-purple colour with mercury, lead, zinc and contain other m etal ions in acid solution. 
When metal ions are absent, for example, in the presence of an exce ss of disodium ethylenediamine 
tetraacetate , this solution is yellow. 
 
Xylenol Orange Solution  –Dissolve 0.1 g of xylenol orange with 100 ml of water and filter, if necessary. 
 
Zinc Acetate – analytical grade reagent of commerce. 
 
Zinc Acetate – Aluminum Chloride Reagent:  Dissolve 20 g of zinc acetate  and 5 g of aluminum chloride  in 
sufficient water to make 100 ml. 
 
Zinc acetate solution 0.05M  - Dissolve 10.9690 g of z inc acetate  in 50 ml purified water and few drops of  glacial 
acetic acid  and dilute to 1000 ml. 
 
  CCCLXXIII  APPENDIX- 5 
 
5.1. CHEMICAL TESTS AND ASSAYS 
 
5.1.1. - ESTIMATION OF TOTAL PHENOLICS  
 
Prepare a stock solution (1 mg/ml) of the extract in methanol . From the stock solution, take 
suitable quantity of the extract into 25-ml volumetric flask and add 10 ml of water and 1.5 ml of  Folin 
Ciocalteau reagent . Keep the mixture for 5 min, and then add 4 ml of 20 per cent sodium carbonate 
solution  and make up to 25 ml with double distilled water.  
 
Keep the mixture for 30 min and record absorbance at 765 nm. Calculate per centage of total phenolics 
from calibration curve of gallic acid prepared by using the above procedure and express total phenolics as 
percentage of gallic acid. 
 
5.1.2. - ESTIMATION OF TOTAL TANNINS  
 
Defat 2 g of sample with 25 ml petroleum ether  for 12 h. Boil the marc for 2 h with 300 ml of double 
distilled water . Cool, dilute up to 500 ml and filter. Measure 25 ml of this infusion into 2 -litre porcelain dish; add 
20 ml Indigo solution  and 750 ml double distilled water . Titrate it with 0.1N potassium permanganate solution, 1 
ml at a time, until blue solution changes to green. Thereafter add dr ops wise until solution becomes golden yellow 
in colour.  
 
Similarly, titrate mixture of 20-ml Indigo solution  and 750 ml of double distilled water . Calculate the 
difference between two titrations in ml.  
 
Each ml of 0.1 N potassium permanganate solution  is equivalent to 0.004157 g of total tannins. 
 
5.1.3. - ESTIMATION OF SUGARS  
 
Method A: 
Estimate total soluble and reducing sugars according to Nelson – Somog yi photometric method for the 
determination of glucose.  
 
Preparation of calibration curve for d-glucose (Dextrose) 
 
Dissolve accurately weighed 500 mg of dextrose in a 100-ml volumetr ic flask (5 mg / ml). From the above 
stock solution pipette out aliquots of 0.05 ml to 0.3 ml in to 10- ml volumet ric flask and makeup the volume with 
double distilled water . Add 1 ml of alkaline reagent to each tube (25 parts of Reagent I + 1 part of Reagent II).  
 
Reagent I:  Dissolve 25 g of anhydrous sodium carbonate 25 g of Rochelle salt or sodium potassium tartrate, 20 g 
of sodium bicarbonate  and 200 g of anhydrous sodium sulphate  in about 800 ml of water and dilute to 1 L.  
 
Reagent II  : Add 15 per cent copper sulphate  containing concentrated sulphuric acid  per 100 ml to the tube. Mix 
the contents and heat for 20 min in a boiling water-bath. Then cool the tube s and add the solution 1 ml of 
arsenomolybdic acid reagent  (dissolve 250 mg of ammonium molybdate  in 45 ml of purified water . To this, add 
2.1 ml of concentrated sulphuric acid  and mix well. To this solution, dissolve 3 g of sodium arsenate  in 25 ml of  
purified water , mix well and place in incubator maintained at 37 º C for 24 hr). Dilut e the contents of the test tube 
to 10 ml by adding purified water  mix well and then read color intensity at 520 nm using a ultra violet  visible 
spectrophotometer. Record the absorbance and plot a standard curve of absorbance vs.  concentration.   CCCLXXIV   
5.1.3.1. - Reducing sugars 
 
For reducing sugars, weigh accurately 500 mg of the sample, dissolve  in 100 ml of double distilled water  
and make up the volume to 100 ml in a volumetric flask. Then follow me thod as mentioned for the preparation of 
calibration curve. 
 
5.1.3.2. - Total sugars 
 
Place 25 ml of the solution from the 100 ml stock solution prepared for t he reducing sugars in a 100 ml 
beaker. To this, add 5 ml of hydrochloric acid: purified water  (1:1 v/v), mix well and allow to stand at room 
temperature for 24 hr for inversion. Neutralize the sample with 5 N  sodium hydroxide  and make up to 50 ml with 
purified water . From this diluted sample, use 1 ml of aliquot for the estimation of total soluble sugars using the 
method described in preparation of calibration curve for dextrose. 
 
5.1.3.3. - Non -reducing sugars 
 
Non-reducing sugars are determined by subtracting the content of reducing sugars fr om the amount of total 
sugars. 
 
Preparation of reagent: 
 
Fehling’s solution : 
 
A) Dissolve 69.278 g of copper  sulphate  in water and make the volume up to 1 liter. 
 
B) Dissolve 100 g of sodium hydroxide  and 340 g sodium potassium tartarate  in purified water and make the 
volume to 1 liter. 
 
Mix equal volumes of A and B before the experiment. 
 
Clarifying reagent : 
 
Solution 1: Dissolve 21.9 g of zinc acetate  and 3 ml of glacial acetic acid  in purified water and make the volume to 
100 ml. 
 
Solution II: Dissolve 10.6 g of potassium ferrocyanide  in water and make up to 100 ml. 
 
Reducing sugars : Take suitable amount of the sample and neutralize with sodium hydroxide solution  (10per cent 
in water). Evaporate the neutralized solution to half the volume on a water bath at 50 0 to remove the alcohol. Cool 
the solution add 10 ml of the clarifying solution I followed by 10 ml of t he clarifying solution II. Mix, filter 
through a dry filter paper and make up the volume to 100 ml. Take 10 ml of the Fehling’s solution  and from a 
burette and add sugar solution (above prepared sample) in a drop wise manne r and heat to boiling over the hot plate 
(maintained at 80 0) until the mixture of Copper ( Fehling’s solution ) appears to be nearly reduced. Add 3-5 drops of 
1per cent methylene blue  and continue the titration till the blue colour is discharged. Note down the readings and 
calculate the percentage of glucose. 
 
Non-reducing sugars : Take suitable amount of the sample and neutralize with sodium hydroxide solution  (10per 
cent in water). Evaporate the neutralized solution to half the volume on a water ba th at 50 0C to remove the alcohol. 
Cool the solution add 10 ml of the clarifying solution I followed by 10 ml of the clarifying solution II. Mix, filter 
through a dry filter paper. To the Filter add 15 ml of 0.1 N hydrochloric acid . Cover with stopper and heat to  CCCLXXV  boiling for two minutes. Add phenolpthlein and neutralize with sodium hydroxide  solution (10per cent). Transfer to 
100 ml volumetric flask and make the volume to 100 ml and perform the titration as done for the reducing sugars. 
Calculate the percentage of the total sugars. Subtract the perce ntage of the reducing sugars from the sugars to 
obtain non reducing sugars. 
 
5.1.4. FIEHE’S TEST 
 
 Reagents 
Resorcinol solution – Dissolve 1 g resublimed resorcinol in 100 ml hydrochloric acid ( sp gr 1.18 t o 1.19 ). 
Ether – sulphuric ether. 
 
Procedure  – Transfer about 5 g of the honey sample into a mortar, using a pastl e, mix the honey with 10 ml of 
ether. Decant the ether extract into a porcelain dish. Repeat the extraction tw ice in the same manner and collect the 
extract in the same dish. Allow the extracts to evaporate to dryne ss at room temperature and add a large drop of 
freshly prepared resorcinol solution. The production of cherry red colour appe aring instantly indicates a positive 
reaction. Faint pink colour disappearing after a short time or yell ow to salmon pink colours indicate a negative 
reaction. 
 
5.1.5. ANILINE CHLORIDE TEST  
 
Reagent  
Aniline chloride solution – To 100 ml of aniline, add 30 ml of hydrochloric acid. (10:3). 
 
Procedure  – Place 5 g of the sample in a porcelain dish and add, while stirring, 2.5 ml of r ecently prepared aniline 
chloride solution. In the presence of commercial invert sugar within one minute, the reagent assumes orange red 
colour turning dark red. Yellow to salmon shades have no significance. 
 
5.1.6. DETERMINATION OF SULPHUR DIOXIDE  
 
Sulphur dioxide is determined by the modified Monier-William’s Method – 
The apparatus as assembled is shown below 
 
                                   Assembly for determination of Sulphur dioxide 
  CCCLXXVI  Reagents 
 
(a) Sodium Carbonate Solution - 10 percent (m/v). aqueous  
(b) Bromophenol Blue Indicator  – Dissolve 0.1 g of bromophenol blue in 3.0 ml of 0.05 N sodium 
hydroxide solution and 5 ml of ethyl alcohol (90 percent by volume) by gently  warming. Make up the 
volume of the solution with ethyl alcohol (20 percent v/v) to 250 ml in a volumetric flask.  
(c) Hydrogen peroxide solution - Dilute a 30 percent (m/v) hydrogen peroxide solution with about twice 
its volume of water and neutralize the free sulphuric acid that ma y be present in the hydrogen peroxide 
solution with barium hydroxide solution, using bromophenol blue indicator solution. Al low the 
precipitate of barium sulphate to settle, and filter. Determine t he concentration of hydrogen peroxide in 
the filtrate by titrating with standard potassium permanganate s olution. Dilute the filtrate with cold water 
so as to obtain a 3 percent (m/v) solution of hydrogen peroxide. 
(d) Concentrated Hydrochloric acid - sp.gr. 1.16 
 
(e) Carbon dioxide gas - from a cylinder. 
 
(f) Standard sodium hydroxide solution -0.1 N, standardized at the time of the experiment using bromophenol 
blue indicator solution. 
 
Procedure 
Assemble the apparatus as shown above. Introduce into the flask C, 300 ml  of water and 20 ml of concentrated 
hydrochloric acid through the dropping funnel E. Run a steady current of cold w ater through the condenser F. Boil 
the mixture contained in the flask G for a short time to expel the air from the system in current of carbon dioxide 
gas previously passed through the wash bottle A. Weigh accurately a bout 100 g of the material and mix with the 
minimum quantity of water so as to make the diluted material ea sily flow down to the dropping funnel. Introduce 
the diluted material into the flask C through the dropping funnel E. Wash the dropping funnel wit h a small quantity 
of water and run the washing into the flask C. Again boil the mixture  contained in the flask C in a slow current of 
carbon dioxide gas   (passed previously through the wash bottle A) for one hour. Just before the end of the 
distillation, stop the flow of water in the condenser. (This causes t he condenser to become hot and drives over 
residual traces of sulphur dioxide retained in the condenser.) When the del ivery tube H, just above the Erlenmeyer 
flask j, becomes hot to touch, remove the stopper J immediately. Was h the delivery tube H and the contents of the 
Peligot tube L with water into Erlenmeyer flask. Cool the content s of the Erlenmeyer flask to room temperature, 
add a few drops of bromophenol blue indicator and titrate with standard sodium hydroxide solution. (Br omophenol 
blue is unaffected by carbon dioxide and gives a distinct change of color in cold hydrogen peroxide s olution). 
 
Carry out a blank determination using 20 ml of Conc,. Hydrochloric acid  diluted with 300 ml of water. 
 
Calculation 
 
Sulphur dioxide, mg/kg = 0 .032000 (V-v) x1000x1000xN  
                                                                   W 
Where 
V = volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution required for the test with the materi al 
v = volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution required for the blank determination; 
N = normality of standard sodium hydroxide solution; and 
W = weight in g of the material taken for the test 
 
5.1.7. DETERMINATION OF TOTAL REDUCING SUGARS, SUCROSE AND  FRUCTOSE           – 
GLUCOSE RATIO 
  CCCLXXVII  TOTAL REDUCING SUGARS 
 
Reagents 
 
Soxhlet Modification of Fehling’s solution  – Prepare by mixing equal volumes of Solution A and Solution B 
immediately before using. 
 
Copper sulphate solution (Solution A)  – Dissolve 34.639 g of copper sulphate crystals  (CuSO 4.5H 2O)in water, 
dilute to 500ml and filter through glass wool or filter paper. 
 
Standardization of copper sulphate solution  – Using separate pipettes, pipette accurately 5 ml of Solution A and 
5 ml of Solution B into a conical flask of 250 ml capacity. Heat thi s mixture to boiling on an asbestos gauze and 
add standard invert sugar solution from a burette, about one millilitre  less than the expected volume which will 
reduce the Fehling’s solution completely 48 ml. Add one ml of methylene blue indica tor while keeping the solution 
boiling. Complete the titration within three minute, the end point being i ndicated by change of colour from blue to 
red. From the volume of invert sugar solution used, calculate the str ength(s) of the copper sulphate solution by 
multiplying the titre value by 0.001 (mg/ml of the standard invert s ugar solution). This would give the quantity of 
invert sugar required to reduce the copper in 5 ml copper sulphate solution. 
 
Potassium Sodium Tartrate (Rochelle Salt)Solution (Solution B)  – Dissolve 173 g of potassium sodium tartrate 
and 50 g of sodium hydroxide in water, dilute to 500 ml. Let the solution stand for a day and filter. 
 
Hydrochloric acid  – Sp gr 1.18 at 20 0C (approximately 12 N). 
 
Standard Invert Sugar Solution  – Weigh accurately 0.95 g sucrose and dissolve it in 500 ml water. A dd 2 ml of 
concentrated hydrochloric acid, boil gently for 30 minutes and keep aside for 24 hours. Neutralize with sodium 
carbonate and make the final volume to 1000 ml; 50 ml of this solution contains 0.05 g invert sugar.  
 
Methylene Blue Indicator  – 0.02 per cent in water. 
 
Procedure  – Place accurately weighed about one gram ( W) of the prepared sample of honey into a 250 ml 
volumetric flask and dilute with about 150 ml of water. Mix thoroughly t he contents of the flask and make the 
volume to 250 ml with water. Using separate pipettes, take accura tely 5 ml of each of Solution A and Solution B, 
in a porcelain dish. Add about 12 ml of honey solution from a burette and heat to boiling over an asbestos gauze. 
Add 1 ml of methylene blue indicator and while keeping the solution boiling  complete the titration, within three 
minutes, the end point being indicated by change of colour from blue to red. N ote the volume (H) in ml of honey 
solution required for the titration. 
 
Calculation  
 
Toatl reducing sugars, per cent by mass = 250 x 100  x S 
                                                                       H x M 
Where 
S = strength of copper sulphate solution, 
H = volume in ml of honey solution required for titration, and 
M = mass in g of honey. 
SUCROSE  
 
Procedure – To 100 ml of the stock honey solution, add one ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid and heat the 
solution to near boiling. Keep aside overnight. Neutralize this invert ed honey solution with sodium carbonate and 
determine the total reducing sugars as described as above.  CCCLXXVIII   
Calculation 
 
Sucrose, per cent by mass = [(reducing sugars after inversion, pe r cent by mass) – (reducing sugars before 
inversion, per cent by mass)] x 0.95 
 
FRUCTOSE – GLUCOSE RATIO 
 
Reagents 
 
Iodine Solution  – 0.05 N. 
 
Sodium hydroxide solution – 0.1 N. 
 
Sulphuric Acid  – concentrated. 
 
Standard Sodium Thiosulphate Solution  – 0.05 N. 
 
Procedure  – Pipette 50 ml of honey solution in a 250 ml stoppered flask. Add 40 ml of iodine solution and 25 ml 
of sodium hydroxide solution. Stopper the flask and keep in dark for 20 minutes . Acidify with 5 ml of sulphuric 
acid and titrate quickly the excess of iodine against standard sodium thiosuphate solution. Conduct a blank using 
50 ml of water instead of honey solution. 
 
Calculations 
 
Approximately glucose, 
Per cent by mass ( w) = (B – S) x 0.004502 x 100  
                                                          a                                
where 
 
B = volume of sodium thiosulphate solution required for the blank, 
S = volume of sodium thiosulphate solution required for the sample, and 
a = mass of honey taken for test. 
 
Approximate 
Fructose, per cent 
By mass ( x)            = Approximate total reducing sugars, per cent – w 
                                                           0.925 
 
True glucose, per cent by mass ( y) = w – 0.012 x 
True fructose, 
 Per cent by 
   mass  ( z)     = Approximate  reducing sugars, per cent –  y 
                                              0.925 
 
True reducing sugars, per cent by mass = y+z 
 
Fructose – glucose ratio = True fructose, per cent by mass ( z) 
                                           True glucose, per cent by mass ( y)   
   
5.2.- ESTIMATION OF CURCUMIN BY TLC DENSITOMETER   CCCLXXIX   
Sample solution - Extract 5 g of avaleha with methanol  (25 ml x 4), filter, pool, concentrate and make up the 
volume to 25 ml with methanol.   
 
Standard solution - Prepare a s0tock solution of curcumin  (160 µg/ml) by dissolving 4 mg of accurately weighed 
curcumin in methanol and making up the volume to 25 ml with methanol. Trans fer the aliquots (0.4 – 1.4 ml) of 
stock solution to 10 ml volumetric flasks and make up the volume wit h methanol to obtain standard solutions 
containing 6.4 to 22.4 µg/ml curcumin, respectively. 
 
Calibration curve  - Apply 10 µl of the standard solutions (64 to 224 ng) on a precoated TLC plate of unifor m 
thickness. Develop the plate in the solvent system  toluene: ethyl acetate: methanol  (5 : 0.5 : 1) to a distance of 10 
cm. Scan the plate densitometrically at 429 nm. Record the peak are a and prepare the calibration curve by plotting 
peak area vs  concentration of curcumin applied. 
 
Estimation of curcumin in the drug - Apply 5 µl of the test solution on a precoated silica gel 60 F 254  TLC plate. 
Develop the plate in the solvent system  toluene: ethyl acetate: methanol  (5: 0.5: 1) and record the chromatogram as 
described above for the calibration curve. Calculate the amount of cur cumin  present in the sample from the 
calibration curve of curcumin. 
 
5.2.1. -Determination of Aluminium 
 
Solutions 
 
10 per cent sodium hydroxide solution  – Dissolve 10 g sodium hydroxide  in 100 ml purified water.  
 
EDTA solution 0.05 M  – Dissolve 18.6120 g of sodium salt of EDTA in purified water and make up to 1000 ml. 
 
Zinc acetate solution 0.05M  - Dissolve 10.9690 g of z inc acetate  in 50 ml purified water and few drops of  glacial 
acetic acid  and dilute to 1000 ml. 
 
Acetate buffer 5.5 pH  – Dissolve 21.5 g of sodium acetate  (AR) in 300 ml purified water  containing 2 ml glacial 
acetic acid  and dilute to 1000 ml  
 
Xylenol orange indicator  –Dissolve 0.2 g of xylenol orange indicator  in 100 ml purified water  with 2 ml acetic 
acid . 
 
Procedure 
 
Take suitable aliquot from the stock solution in 250 ml beaker. Take 50 ml of 10 per cent sodium 
hydroxide  solution  in another beaker. Neutralize the aliquot with sodium hydroxide  solution . Transfer the 10 per 
cent sodium hydroxide  solution  to aliquot with constant stirring. Add a pinch of sodium carbonate  into the solution. 
Boil the content on burner. Cool and filter through Whatman 40 No. filter pape r with pulp in 600 ml beaker. Wash 
the precipitate with hot water 6-8 times. Acidify the filtrate  with dil. hydrochloric acid  and adjust pH 5.5. Add, in 
excess normally 25 ml 0.05M EDTA solution. Add 25 ml acetate buffer solution . Boil the solution; cool and again 
adjust pH 5 – 5.5. Add 5-6 drops of xylenol orange indicator . The colour changes from golden yellow to orange 
red at the end point. Take 25 m l0.05 M EDTA solution and run a blank. Each of  1M EDTA is equivalent to 
0.05098 g of Al 2O3. 
                   
5.2.2. - Determination of Borax 
  CCCLXXX  Powder 5-6 g of drug and incinerated at 450 O for 3 hours to get it ash. Dissolve the ash in 20 ml. of purified  
water  and left for 15 minutes, filter, wash the residue with 80 ml of purified  water for 4-5 washings. If necessary, 
shake the contents and titrate with 0.5N hydrochloric acid  using solution of m ethyl orange  as an indicator. Each ml 
of 0.5N hydrochloric acid  is equivalent to 0.09536 g of Na 2 B 4O7.10H 2O. 
 
5.2.3. - Determination of Calcium 
 
Solutions 
  
20 per cent Potassium hydroxide solution  – Dissolve 200 g potassium hydroxide  in purified  water and make up 
to 1000 ml. 
Ammonia buffer solutions 9.5 pH  – Dissolve 67.5 g ammonium chloride  in 300 ml purified  water , add 570 ml 
ammonia solution  and dilute to 1000 ml. 
 
EDTA (Ethylene Diethyl Tetra Acetic acid) solution 0.05 M  – Dissolve 18.6120 g of solution salt of EDTA and 
in water and make up to 1000 ml. 
 
Triethanolamine 20per cent Solution  – 200 ml of triethanolamine, adds 800 ml water and make up to 1000 ml. 
 
Eriochrome Black T indicator 0.1per cent solution  – Dissolve 0.10 g indicator in 100 ml of Methanol. 
 
Patterns & Reeders indicators 0.1per cent  solution  – Dissolve 0.01g indicator in 100 ml of Methanol. 
 
Procedure 
 
Take one part of filtrate reserved from Iron (Fe) estimation. Add 5 ml Triethanolamine 20 per cent 
solution. Add a pinch of Hydroxylamine hydrochloride . Add 25-30 ml potassium hydroxide  20 per cent solution. 
Add 4-5 drops of Patterns and Reeders indicator, which imparts rose red colour. Titrate the solution against 
standard EDTA solution. The colour changes from rose red to Prussian blue mark end point.  
 
 Each ml of 1M EDTA solution is equivalent to 0.04008 g Calcium. 
                         
5.2.4. - Determination of Copper(Cu) 
 
Solutions 
 
Standard 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate solutions   
 
Potassium iodide . 
 
Starch 1per cent solution  – Dissolve 1 g in water, boil and make up 100ml. 
 
 
Procedure 
 
Take suitable aliquot from the stock solution in a beaker. Add approx. 1.0 g  sodium fluoride. Add 
ammonia solution  and precipitate solution. Add acetic acid  to dissolve the precipitate. Boil and cool in water bath. 
Add approx 1.0 g potassium iodide . Titrate the liberated iodine against 0.1 N sodium thoisulphate  (hypo) solutions 
by adding starch solution  as indicator. The liberated iodine colour blackish brown changes to whit e at the end 
point. Calculate copper value against 1 ml of hypo solution titrating against standard 1000 ppm  copper solution. 
   CCCLXXXI  Each ml of 1N Na 2S2O3 solution is equivalent to 0.06357 g of Copper 
 
5.2.5. - Determination of Iron (Fe) 
 
Preparation of sample solution  
 
Ignite a suitable quantity of the sample (in the presence of organic  matter) in a crucible in a muffle furnace 
at 500-550 0 until the residue is free from organic matter. Moisten with 5- 10 ml of hydrochloric acid, boil for two 
min, add 30 ml of water, heat on the water bath for few min, filter and wash thoroughly the residue with water and 
make up to volume in a volumentric flask. 
 
Solutions  
 
Stannous chloride solution  – Dissolve 5 g stannous chloride (A.R) in 25 ml Conc. hydrochloric acid   and dilute 
to 100 ml (5 per cent solution). 
 
Mercuric chloride  – saturated solution in water. 
 
Sulphuric acid + orthophosphoric acid mixture  – take 60 ml water, add 15 ml conc. sulphuric acid   and 15 ml 
H3PO 4 cool and dilute to 1000ml. 
 
Diphenylamine barium sulphonate  – Dissolve 0.25 g in 100 ml water. 
 
0.1 N Standard potassium dichromate solution -  Dissolve 4.9035 g AR grade in water and dilute to 1000 ml. 
 
Procedure 
 
Take /withdraw a suitable aliquot from the stock solution in 250 ml i n duplicate. Dilute to about 100 ml 
with distilled water. Add 1-2 drops of methyl red  indicator. Add 1-2 g ammonium chloride . Add dil. Ammonium 
solution till brown precipitate appears. Boil the solution with ppt. for 4 -5 minutes. Cool the content and filter 
through Whatman 41 no. filter paper. Wash the residue with hot water 4-6 times. D issolve the residue in dil. HCl in 
250 ml beaker. Wash with hot water and make the volume to 100 ml approx. B oil the solution on burner. Reduce 
the Fe 3+  to Fe 2+  by adding stannous chloride  solution  drop wise till solution becomes colourless. 
 
Add 1-2 drops of stannous chloride solution  in excess. Cool the content in water. Add 10-15 ml 10per cent 
solution of mercuric chloride . Add 25 ml acid mixture. Add 2-3 drops of diphenylamine barium sulphonate 
indicator . Add distilled water, if required. Titrate against standard potassium dichromate solution . Appearance of 
violet colour show end point. 
Each ml of 1N K 2Cr 2O7 solution is equivalent to 0.05585 g Iron 
Each ml of 1N K 2Cr 2O7  solution is equivalent to 0.7985 g Fe 2O3 
 
 
5.2.6. - Determination of Magnesium 
 
Take another part of filtrate reserved from Fe estimation. Add 5 ml triethanolamine 20 per cent solution . 
Add a pinch of hydroxylamine hydrochloride . Add 25-30 ml ammonia buffer 9.5 pH . Add 4-5 drops of eriochrome 
black T indicator. The colour changes from rose red to blue marks the end point.  
 
Each ml of 1M EDTA solution is equivalent to 0.0409 g of MgO. 
 
5.2.7. - Determination of Mercury  CCCLXXXII   
Powder 0.5 g drug and treat with 7 ml of conc. nitric acid  and 15 ml of conc. sulphuric acid  in a kjeldahl 
flask; heat under reflux gently at first then strongly for 30 minut es. Cool and add 50 ml conc. nitric acid  boil so as 
to remove the brown fumes. Continue the addition of nitric acid  and boiling until the liquid is colourless; cool, 
wash the condenser with 100 ml of water, remove the flask and add 1.0 per  cent potassium permangnate  solution 
drop wise until pink colour persists. Decolourize it by adding 6.0 per cent  hydrogen peroxide  drop wise to remove 
excess of potassium permangnate  followed by 3.0 ml of conc. nitric acid  and titrate with 0.1N ammonium 
thiocyanate solutions  using ferric alum  as indicator. 
 
Each ml. of 0.1N NH 4SCN solution is equivalent to 0.01003 g Mercury. 
 
5.2.8. - Determination of Silica (SiO 2) 
 
Weigh 0.5 g (in case of high silica) or 1.0 g (low silica) finely  powdered and dried sample in a platinum 
crucible (W 1). Add 4-5 g anhydrous sodium carbonate  into the crucible. Mix thoroughly and cover the crucible 
with lid, if necessary. Place the crucible in muffle furnace. Al low the temperature to rise gradually to reach 900-
950 0 and keep on this temp. for about ½ hour to complete the fusion. Take out the crucible and allow cool at room 
temperature. Extract the cooled mass in 25-30 ml dil hydrochloric acid  in 250 ml beaker. Heat on hot plate/burner 
to dissolve the contents. Wash the crucible with distilled water. K eep the beaker on water bath and allow dry the 
mass. Dehydrate back and powder the mass. Take out the beaker and al low cooling at room temperature. Add 25-
30 ml hydrochloric acid  dilute to 100 ml distilled water. Boil the content and allow cool. Fil ter through Whatman 
no 40. filter paper. Wash the residue with hot water 6-8 times. Place  the residue along with filter paper in platinum 
crucible. Ignite at 900-950 0 for 2-3 min. Allow to cool and weigh as SiO 2.  
           
5.2.9. - Estimation of Sodium and Potassium by Flame Photometer 
 
Preparation of Standard Solutions 
 
 Weigh 2.542 g of AR sodium chloride  and dissolve in purified water  and make upto 1000 ml in a 
volumetric flask. Dilute 1 ml of the stock solution to 100 ml. This g ives standard of 1mg of sodium per 100 ml (10 
ppm). Prepare 20, 30, 40 and 50 ppm standard solution. 
Weigh 1.9115g of AR potassium chloride  and dissolve in purified water  and make up to 1000 ml in a 
volumetric flask. Dilute 1ml of the stock solution to 100ml. This giv es standard of 1mg of sodium per 100 ml (10 
ppm). Prepare 20, 30, 40 and 50 ppm standard solution. 
 
Preparation of Sample Solution 
 
 Weigh 10 g of sample in a preweighed silica dish and heat in a muff le furnace for 1hr at 600º. Cool and 
dissolve the ash in purified water and make up to 100 ml in a volumetric flask.  
 
Switch on the instrument first and then the pump. Keep distilled water  for aspiration and allow it to stand 
for 15 min (warming time). Open the glass cylinder and ignite the flame. Adjust the i nstrument to zero. 
 
Introduce the maximum concentration solution and adjust it to 100. Again introduc e the purified water so 
that instrument shows zero. Then introduce the standard solution in ascendi ng concentration. Note down the 
reading each time. Introduce the purified water for aspiration in bet ween the standard solutions. Introduce the 
sample solution and if it is within the range take the reading. If  it exceeds limit 100 then dilute the solution till the 
reading is within the range. Plot the curve with concentration in ppm against reading obtained. Find out the 
concentration of the sample solution. Take two or three readings and fi nd out the average. Find out the 
concentration of sodium and potassium. 
  CCCLXXXIII  5.2.10. - Determination of Sodium Chloride 
 
Dissolve about 2-3g accurately weighed drug in 25 ml of purified  water  and left for 30 minutes, filter. 
Wash the filter paper completely with purified  water  and the filtrate is made 100 ml in volumetric flask, make the 
solution homogeneous, titrate 25 ml of this solution with 0.1 N silver nitrate solution  using potassium chromate  as 
indicator. The end point shows the light brick red colour.  
  
Each ml. of 0.1  N Ag NO 3 solution is equivalent to 0.005845 g of NaCl.  
 
5.2.11. - Determination of Sulphur 
 
Solution 
 
Carbon tetrachloride  saturated with  Bromine 
 
Barium chloride  – 10 per cent solution in water. 
 
Procedure 
 
Take 0.5 – 1 g powdered sample in 250 ml beaker. Add 10 ml carbon tetrachloride saturated with 
bromine. Keep in cold condition in fume chamber over night. Add 10 – 15 ml conc.  nitric acid . Digest on water 
bath. Add 10 ml conc. hydrochloric acid , digest it to expel nitrate fumes till syrupy mass. Cool and extr act with 
hydrochloric acid , make volume to 100 ml. Boil and filter through Whatman No 40. filter pa per. Wash the residue 
with hot water. Filter through Whatman 41 No. paper in 600 ml beaker. Acidify the fi ltrate with hydrochloric acid . 
Add 20 ml of 10 per cent Barium chloride  solution. Stir the solution and digest on burner. Allow to settle BaSO 4 
precipitate over night. Filter the precipitate through Whatman No. 42 filter paper. Wash the precipitate with water. 
Ignite the precipitate in muffle furnace in pre weighed platinum crucible up to 850 0. Allow to cool and weigh. 
 
 Each g of weight of precipitate is equivalent to 0.13734 g of Sulphur. 
 
5.2.12. - Qualitative Reactions of Some Radicals 
 
Sodium 
 
 Sodium compounds, moistened with hydrochloric acid and introduced on a platinum wire int o the flame of 
a Bunsen burner, give a yellow colour to the flame. 
 Solutions of sodium salts yield, with solution of uranyl zinc acetate, a yellow crys talline precipitate. 
 
Potassium 
 
 Potassium compounds moistened with hydrochloric acid and introduced on platinum wire into the fl ame of 
a Bunsen burner, give a violde colour to the flame. 
 
 Moderately strong solutions of potassium salts, which have been previ ously ignited to remove ammonium 
salts, give a white, crystalline precipitate with perchloric acid. 
 
 Solutions of potassium salts, which have been previously ignited to fr ee them from ammonium salts and 
from which iodine has been removed, give a yellow precipitate with solution os sodium cobaltinitrte and acetic 
acid. 
 
Magnesium  CCCLXXXIV   
 Solution of magnesium salts yield a white precipitate with solution of ammonium ca rbonate, especially on 
boiling, but yield no precipitate in the presence of solution of ammonium chloride. 
 
Solution of magnesium salts yield a white crystalline precipita te with solution of sodium phosphate in the 
presence of ammonium salts and dilute ammonia solution. 
 
 Solution of magnesium salts yield with solution of sodium hydroxide a whit e precipitate insoluble in 
excess of the reagent, but soluble in solution of ammonium chloride. 
 
Carbonates and Bicarbonates 
 
 Carbonates and bicarbonates effervesce with dilute acids, liberati ng carbon doxide; the gas is colourless 
and produces a wihte precipitate in solution of calcium hydroxide. 
 
Solutions of carbonates produce a brownish-red precipitate with solution of mercuric chloride; Solutions of 
bicarbonates produce a white precipitate. 
 
Solutions of carbonates yield, with solution of silver nitrate, a wit h precipitate which becomes yellow on 
the addition of an excess of the reagent and brown on boiling the mixture. T he precipitate is soluble in dilute 
ammonia solution and in dilute nitric acid. 
 
 Solutions of carbonates produce, at room temperature, a white precipita te with solution of magnesium 
sulphate. Solutions of bicarbonates yield no precipitate with the reage nt at room temperature, but on boiling the 
mixture a white precipitate is formed. 
 
Solutions of bicarbonates, on boiling, liberate carbon dioxide which produces a w hite precipitate in 
solution of calcium hydroxide. 
 
Sulphates 
 
 Solutions of sulphates yield, with solution of barium chloride, a white precipitate i nsoluble in hydrochloric 
acid. 
 
 Solutions of sulphates yield, with solution of lead acetate, a white precipitate soluble in solution of 
ammonium acetate and in solution of sodium hydroxide. 
 
Chlorides 
 
 Chlorides, heated with manganese dioxide and sulphuric acid, yield chlorine, recognisabl e by its odour and 
by giving a blue colour with potassium iodide and solution of starch. 
 
Calcium 
 
Solutions of calcium salts yield, with solution of ammonium carbonate, a  white precipitate which after 
boiling and cooling the mixture, is insoluble in solution of ammonium chloride.    CCCLXXXV  APPENDIX-6 
 
6.1. WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
 
6.1.1. - METRIC EQUIVALENTS OF CLASSICAL WEIGHTS AND  MEASURES 
 
Weights and measures described in Ayurvedic classics and their metri c equivalents adopted by the 
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee 
  
 The following table of metric equivalents of weigh ts 
and measures, linear measures and measurement of ti me used 
in the Ayurvedic classics have been approved by the  
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia committee in consultation w ith 
Indian Standards Institution. 
 
 
I. WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
 
 
Classical Unit    Metric 
     Equivalent 
 
1 Ratti or Gu ®j¢    = 125 mg 
8 Ratti or Gu®j¢s =1 M ¢¾a = 1 g 
12 M ¢¾as  =1 Kar ¾a = 12 g 
      (Tola)  
2 Kar ¾as (Tolas) =1 ¹ukti = 24 g 
2 ¹uktis   =1 Palam = 48 g 
(4 Kar ¾as or Tolas) 
2 Palams  =1 Prasrti = 96 g 
2 Pras ¨tis  =1 Ku ²ava = 192 g 
2 Ku ²avas  =1 M ¢nika = 384 g 
2 M ¢nikas  =1 Prastha = 768 g 
4 Prasthas  =1 ¡²haka = 3 kg 73 g 
4 ¡²hakas  =1 D ¨o´a = 12kg 228 g 
2 D ¨o´as  =1 ¹¦ rpa = 24kg 576 g 
2 ¹¦rpas  =1 D ¨o´i = 49kg 152 g 
      (Vahi)  
4 D ¨o´is  =1 Kh ¢ri = 196kg 608g 
1 Palam     = 48 g 
100 Palams  =1 Tula  = 4 kg 800 g 
20 Tulas  =1 Bh ¢ra = 96 kg 
 
 
  In case of liquids, the metric equivalents 
would be the corresponding litre and milliliter. 
 
 II. LINEAR MEASURES 
Classical Unit  Inches  Metric 
     Equivalents 
 
1. Yavodara  1/8 of ¾ " 0.24 cm 
2. A ¬gula  ¾ "  1.95 cm 
3. Bitahasti  9 "  22.86 cm 
4. Aratni  10 ½ "  41.91 cm 
5. Hasta  18 "  45.72 cm 
6. N ¨pahasta  22 "  55.88 cm 
   (R ¢jahasta) 
7. Vyama  72 "  182.88 cm 
 
III. MEASUREMENT OF TIME  
Unit    Equivalent (in  
    hours, minutes 
    & seconds) 
2 K ¾a¬a =1 Lava 
2 Lavas  =1 Nime ¾a 
3 Nime ¾as =1 Ka ¾°ha = 4.66 seconds 
1 Ghati    = 24 Minutes 
30 Kas °has =1 Kal ¢  = 2 Minutes 
       20 seconds 
20 Kal ¢ + 3  
Ka ¾°has  =1 Muh ¦rta = 48 Minutes  
 
30 Muh ¦rtas =1 Ahor ¢tra = 24 Hrs. 
15 Ahor ¢tras =1 Pak ¾a = 15 Days 
2 Pak ¾as =1 M ¢sa = 30 Days/ 
       One Month 
2 M ¢sa  =1 §tu  = 60 Days/ 
       Two Months 
3 §tus  =1 Ayana = 6 Months 
2 Ayanas =1 Samvatsara  = 12 Months/ 
        One Year 
5 Samvatsara =1Yuga  = 5 Years   
 
1 Ahor ¢tra of Devas  = 1 Year 
1 Ahor ¢tra of Pitaras  = 1 Month   CCCLXXXVI  6.2. - METRIC SYSTEM 
 
Measure of Mass (Weights) 
 
1 Kilogram (Kg)   – is the mass of the International Prototype Kilogram. 
1 Gramme (g)    – the 1000 th   part of 1 Kilogram. 
1Milligram (mg)   – the 1000 th   part of 1 gramme. 
1 Microgram (µg)  – the 1000 th  part of 1 milligram. 
 
Measures of capacity  (Volumes) 
 
1 Litre (1) is the volume occupied at its temperature of maximum density by a quantity of water     having a 
mass of 1 Kilogram. 
 1 Millilitre (ml) the 1000 th  part of 1 litre. 
 
The accepted relation between the litre and the cubic centimetre is 1 litre –1000.027 cubi c centimeters. 
 
Relation of capacity of Weight (Metric)  
 
One litre of water at 20º weighs 997.18 grammes when weighed in air  of density 0.0012 gramme per millilitre 
against brass weights of density 84 grammes per millilitre. 
 
Measures of Length  
 
 1 Metre (m) is the length of the International Prototype Metre at 0. 
 1 Centimetre (cm)    – the 100 th  part of 1 metre. 
 1 Millimetre (mm)    – the 1000 th  part of 1 metre. 
 1 Micron (µ)              – the 1000 th  part of 1 millimetre 
 1 Milliimicron (mµ)  – the 1000 th  part of micron.  CCCLXXXVII  APPENDIX-7 
 
7.1. CLASSICAL AYURVEDIC REFERENCES 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCCLXXXVIII   
 
 
INDEX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCCLXXXIX   
 
 
 
 
ENGLISH EQUIVALENTS OF AYURVEDIC CLINICAL CONDITIONS AND D ISEASES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCCXC  
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCCXCI  MONOGRAPHS PUBLISHED IN AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA OF INDIA 
PART-I, VOL.-I 
                       
81. Ajagandha (Sd.)    Cleome gynandra Linn.    
82. Ajamoda (Frt.)    Apium leptophyllum  (Pers.) F.V.M. ex Benth. 
83. Amalaki (Fr. Frt. Pulp)   Emblica officinalis  Gaertn.    
84. Amalaki (Drd. Frt.)    Emblica officinalis  Gaertn.    
85. Aragvadha (Frt. Pulp.)   Cassia fistula Linn.     
86. Arka (Rt.)     Calotropis procera  (Ait.) R. Br.   
87. Arka (Lf.)    Calotropis procera  (Ait.) R. Br.   
88. Asana (Ht.Wd.)    Pterocarpus marsupium Roxb.    
89. Ashoka (St. Bk.)    Saraca asoca (Rosc.) DC. Willd.    
90. Asvagandha (Rt.)    Withania somnifera Dunal.     
91. Asvattha (Bk.)    Ficus religiosa Linn.      
92. Atasi (Sd.)     Linum usitatissimum Linn.    
93. Atibala (Rt.)    Abutilon indicum (Linn.) Sw.    
94. Ativisa (Rt.)    Aconitum heterophyllum Wall. ex Royle   
95. Babbula (St.Bk.)    Acacia nilotica (Linn.) Willd. ex Del. sp. 
 indica (Benth.) Brenan 
96. Bakuci (Frt.)    Psoralea corylifolia Linn.    
97. Bibhitaka (Frt.)    Terminalia belerica Roxb.     
98. Bilva (Frt. Pulp)    Aegle marmelos Corr.     
99. Candrasura (Sd.)    Lepidium sativum Linn.    
100. Citraka (Rt.)    Plumbago zeylanica  Linn.    
101. Dhanyaka  (Frt.)    Coriandrum sativum  Linn.    
102. Dhataki (Fl.)    Woodfordia fruticosa  (Linn.) Kurz.   
103. Eranda (Rt.)    Ricinus communis Linn.    
104. Gambhari (Rt. Bk.)    Gmelina arborea Roxb    
105. Goksura (Rt.)    Tribulus terrestris Linn.    
106. Goksura (Frt.)    Tribulus terrestris Linn.    
107. Guduci (St.)    Tinospora cordifolia  (Willd.) Miers.   
108. Guggulu (Exudate)    Commiphora wightii  (Arn.) Bhand.   
109. Gunja (Sd.)    Abrus precatorius Linn.    
110. Haridra (Rz.)    Curcuma longa Linn.      
111. Haritaki (Frt.)    Terminalia chebula  Retz.     CCCXCII  112. Hingu (Oleo-Gum-Resin)   Ferula foetida Regel.     
113. Jatamansi (Rz.)    Nardostachys jatamansi DC.     
114. Jatiphala (Sd.)    Myristica fragrans Houtt.     
115. Kampilla (Frt.)    Mallotus philippinensis Muell.-Arg.   
116. Kancanara (St. Bk.)   Bauhinia variegata Blume    
117. Kankola (Frt.)    Piper cubeba Linn. f.      
118. Kantakari (W.P.)    Solanum surattense Burm. f.     
119. Kanyasara (Lf.)    Aloe barbadensis Mill.    
120. Karanja (Sd.)    Pongamia pinnata  (Linn.) Merr.   
121. Karavira (Lf.)    Nerium indicum Mill.     
122. Karkatasrngi  (Gall)   Pistacia chinensis Burgo     
123. Karpasa (Sd.)    G ossypium herbaceum Linn.    
124. Kaseru (Rz.)    Scirpus kysoor Roxb.      
125. Ketaki (Rt.)    Pandanus tectorius Soland. ex Parkinson  
126. Khadira (Ht.Wd.)    Acacia catechu (Linn. f.) Willd.   
127. Kiratatikta (W.P.)    Swertia chirata Buch.-Ham.    
128. Krsnajiraka (Frt.)    Carum carvi Linn.     
129. Kulattha (Sd.)    Vigna unquiculata (Linn.) Walp.   
130. Kustha (Rt.)    Saussurea lappa C.B. Clarke    
131. Kutaja (St. Bk.)    Holarrhena antidysenterica (Roth) A. DC.  
132. Lavanga (Fl. Bud)    Syzygium aromaticum (Linn.) Merr. & M.Perry 
133. Lodhra (St. Bk.)    Symplocos racemosa Roxb.    
134. Madana (Frt.)    Xeromphis spinosa (Thunb.) Keay    
135. Misreya (Frt.)    Foeniculum vulgare Mill.    
136. Nyagrodha (St. Bk.)   Ficus bengalensis Linn.    
137. Pasanabheda (Rz.)    Bergenia ciliata (Haw.) Sternb.   
138. Patha (Rt.)     Cissampelos pareira Linn.    
139. Puga (Sd.)     Areca catechu Linn.     
140. Punarnava (Rakta) (W.P.)   Boerhaavia diffusa Linn.    
141. Saptaparna (St. Bk.)   Alstonia scholaris (Linn.) R. Br.   
142. Sati (Rz.)    Hedychium spicatum Ham. ex Smith   
143. Snuhi (St.)     Euphorbia neriifolia Linn.    
144. Suksmaila (Frt.)   Elettaria cardamomum (Linn.) Maton  
145. Sunthi (Rz.)    Zingiber officinale Roxb.      CCCXCIII  146. Svarnapatri (Lf.)    Cassia angustifolia Vahl.    
147. Svetajiraka (Frt.)    Cuminum cyminum Linn.    
148. Sveta Sariva (Rt.)    Hemidesmus indicus (Linn.) R. Br.   
149. Tagara (Rz.)    Valeriana wallichii DC.    
150. Tamalaki (Rt., St. & Lf.)   Phyllanthus fraternus Webst.     
151. Tvak (Bk.)     Cinnamomum zeylanicum Blume    
152. Tvakapatra (Lf.)    Cinnamomum tamala (Buch.-Ham.) Nees & Eberm. 
153. Udumbara (Bk.)   Ficus racemosa Linn.     
154. Upakuncika (Sd.)    Nigella sativa Linn.     
155. Varuna (St. Bk.)    Crataeva nurvala Buch.-Ham.   
156. Vasa (Lf.)     Adhatoda vasica Nees     
157. Vidanga (Frt.)    Embelia ribes Burm.f.     
158. Vijaya (Lf.)    Cannabis sativa Linn.     
159. Yasti (St. & Rt.)    Glycyrrhiza glabra Linn.    
160. Yavani (Frt.)    Trachyspermum ammi (Linn.) Sprague ex Turril 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCCXCIV   
 
MONOGRAPHS PUBLISHED IN AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA OF INDIA  
PART-I, VOL. II  
       1.        Akarakarabha (Rt.)   Anacyclus pyrethrum DC.   
79. Aksoda (Cotldn.)    Juglans regia Linn.        
80. Amrata (St. Bk.)    Spondias pinnata  (Linn. f.) Kurz. 
81. Apamarga (W.P.)   Achyranthes aspera  Linn.       
82. Aparajita (Rt.)              Clitoria ternatea Linn.  
83. Ardraka (Rz.)     Zingiber officinale  Rosc.  
84. Arimeda (St.Bk.)   Acacia leucophloea Willd.         
85. Arjuna (St.Bk.)     Terminalia arjuna W.& A.  
86. Bhallataka (Frt.)    Semecarpus anacardium Linn.        
87. Bhrngaraja (W.P.)   Eclipta alba Hassk.          
88. Brahmi (W.P.)    Bacopa monnieri (Linn.) Wettst.        
89. Brhati (Rt.)    Solanum indicum Linn.    
90. Cavya (St.)     Piper retrofractum Vahl.   
91. Dadima (Sd.)   Punica granatum Linn.         
92. Daruharidra (St.)     Berberis aristata DC.   
93. Dronapuspi (W.P.)    Leucas cephalotes Spreng.  
94. Ervaru (Sd.)   Cucumis melo var. utilissimus Duthie & Fuller 
95. Gajapippali (Frt.)    Scindapsus officinalis Schoott.         
96. Gambhari (Frt.)    Gmelina arborea Roxb.        
97. Gangeru (St.Bk.)    Grewia tenax (Forsk.) Aschers & Schwf.    
98. Gunja (Rt.)   Abrus precatorius Linn.          
99. Iksu (St.)     Saccharum officinarum Linn.         
100. Indravaruni (Rt.)   Citrullus colocynthis Schrad.         
101. Indravaruni (Lf.)     Citrullus colocynthis Schrad.         
102. Jambu (Sd.)     Syzygium cuminii (Linn.) Skeels  
103. Jambu (St.Bk.)   Syzygium cuminii (Linn.) Skeels         
104. Jayapala (Sd.)    Croton tiglium Linn.          
105. Jayanti (Lf.)                Sesbania sesban (Linn.) Merr.         
106. Jyotismati (Sd.)    Celastrus paniculatus Willd.         
107. Kadamba (St.Bk.)         Anthocephalus cadamba Miq.          
108. Kakamaci (W.P.)    Solanum nigrum Linn.           CCCXCV 109. Kamala (Fl.)    Nelumbo nucifera Gaertn.          
110. Kapittha (Frt.Pulp)   Feronia limonia (Linn.) Swingle          
111. Karamarda (St.Bk.)   Carissa carandas Linn.          
112. Karanja (Rt.Bk.)            Pongamia pinnata (Linn.) Merr.         
113. Karanja (Rt.)    Pongamia pinnata (Linn.) Merr.         
114. Karanja (St.Bk.)    Pongamia pinnata (Linn.) Merr.         
115. Karanja (Lf.)     Pongamia pinnata (Linn.) Merr.         
116. Karavallaka (Fr. Frt.)  Momordica charantia  Linn.          
117. Katuka (Rz.)    Picrorhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth.   
118. Kokilaksa (W.P.)   Asteracantha longifolia Nees         
119. Kokilaksa (Rt.)     Asteracantha longifolia Nees         
120. Kokilaksa (Sd.)     Asteracantha longifolia Nees   
121. Kozuppa (W.P.)    Portulaca oleracea Linn.          
122. Lajjalu (W.P.)    Mimosa pudica Linn.            
123. Madhuka (Fl.)     Madhuca indica J.F. Gmel.           
124. Matsyaksi (W.P.)   Alternanthera sessilis (Linn.) R. Br.          
125. Methi (Sd.)     Trigonella foenum-graecum Linn. 
126. Mulaka (W.P.)     Raphanus sativus  Linn.            
127. Mulaka (Rt.)    Raphanus sativus  Linn.            
128. Mura (Rt.)    Selinium candollei DC.            
129. Murva (Rt.)   Marsdenia tenacissima Wight. & Arn.          
130. Nagakesar (Stmn.)    Mesua ferrea Linn.            
131. Nili (Lf.)     Indigofera tinctoria Linn.            
132. Nili (Rt.)     Indigofera tinctoria Linn.            
133. Nimba (Lf.)    Azadirachta indica A. Juss.           
134. Nimba (St.Bk.)   Azadirachta indica A. Juss.            
135. Palasa (St.Bk.)     Butea monosperma  (Lam.) Kuntze   
136. Paribhadra (St.Bk.)    Erythrina indica Lam.            
137. Pippalimula (St.)    Piper longum Linn.            
138. Plaksa (St.Bk.)    Ficus lacor  Buch.-Ham.            
139. Prasarini (W.P.)    Paederia foetida Linn.            
140. Priyala (Sd.)    Buchanania lanzan  Spreng.           
141. Priyangu (Infl.)    Callicarpa macrophylla Vahl.           
142. Sali (Rt.)     Oryza sativa Linn.              CCCXCVI  143. Sankhapuspi (W.P.)  Convolvulus pluricaulis Choisy           
144. Saptala (W.P.)   Euphorbia dracunculoides Lam.           
145. Satahva (Frt.)   Anethum sowa Roxb. ex Flem.            
146. Sigru (Lf.)     Moringa oleifera Lam.            
147. Sthulaela (Sd.)   Amomum subulatum Roxb.           
148. Tejovati (St.Bk.)     Zanthoxylum armatum DC.           
149. Tulasi (W.P.)     Ocimum sanctum Linn.            
150. Tulasi (Lf.)   Ocimum sanctum Linn.            
151. Vaca (Rz.)    Acorus calamus Linn.            
152. Vatsanabha (Rt.)   Aconitum chasmanthum Stapf ex Holmes  
153. Vidari (Tub.Rt.)   Pueraria tuberosa DC.            
154. Yava (Frt.)    Hordeum vulgare Linn.            
155. Yavasaka (W.P)   Alhagi pseudalhagi (Bieb.) Desv.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CCCXCVII   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHARMACOPOEIAL MONOGRAPHS TO BE PUBLISHED IN AYURVEDIC 
PHARMACOPOEIA OF INDIA PART-I, VOL.-III 
 
101. Adhaki (Rt.)    Cajanus cajan  (Linn.) Millsp. 
102. Agnimantha (Rt.)   Clerodendrum phlomidis  Linn. f. 
103. Ambasthaki (Rt.)   Hibiscus sabdariffa  Linn. 
104. Amra (Sd.)    Mangifera indica Linn. 
105. Amra (St. Bk.)   Mangifera indica  Linn. 
106. Amrata (St.)    Spondias pinnata  (Linn.f.) Kurz. 
107. Apamarga (Rt.)   Achyranthes aspera  Linn. 
108. Araluka (St. Bk.)   Ailanthus excelsa Roxb. 
109. Arka (St. Bk.)    Calotropis procera (Ait.) R. Br. 
110. Asana (St. Bk.)   Pterocarpus marsupium Roxb. 
111. Asthisamhrta (St.)   Cissus quadrangularis Linn. 
112. Atmagupta (Sd.)   Mucuna prurita  Hook. 
113. Bharangi (Rt.)   Clerodendrum serratum Linn. 
114. Bijapura (Frt.)   Citrus medica Linn. 
115. Bilva (Rt.)    Aegle marmelos  Corr. 
116. Bimbi (W.P.)    Coccinia indica W. & A. 
117. Cangeri (W.P.)   Oxalis corniculata  Linn. 
118. Cirabilva (Frt.)   Holoptelea integrifolia  Planch 
119. Danti (Rt.)    Baliospermum montanum  Muell-Arg. 
120. Dhattura (Sd.)   Datura metel  Linn. 
121. Draksa (Frt.)    Vitis vinifera  Linn. 
122. Durva (Rt.)    Cynodon dactylon  (Linn.) Pers. 
123. Eranda (Lf.)    Ricinus communis Linn. 
124. Eranda (Sd.)    Ricinus communis Linn. 
125. Gambhari (St.)   Gmelina arborea  Roxb. 
126. Gojihva (Aer. Pt.)   Onosma bracteatum  Wall.  CCCXCVIII  127. Granthiparni (Rt.)   Leonotis nepetaefolia  R. Br. 
128. Hamsapadi (W.P.)   Adiantum lunulatum  Burm 
129. Hapusa (Frt.)    Juniperus commun is Linn. 
130. Indravaruni (Frt.)   Citrullus colocynthis  Schrad.  
131. Indrayava (Sd.)   Holarrhena antidysenterica  Wall. 
132. Isvari (Rt.)    Aristolochia indica  Linn. 
133. Jati (Lf.)    Jasminum officinale  Linn. 
134. Kadali (Rz.)    Musa paradisiaca Linn. 
135. Kakajangha (Rt.)   Peristrophe bicalyculata  Linn. 
136. Kakanasika (Sd.)   Martynia annua  Linn. 
137. Kakoli (Tub. Rt.)   Lilium polyphyllum  D. Don 
138. Kamala (Rz.)    Nelumbo nucifera  Gaertn. 
139. Karavira (Rt.)    Nerium indicum  Mill. 
140. Karinkara (Rt.)   Carissa carandas  Linn. 
141. Kasa (Rt.)    Saccharum spontaneum  Linn. 
142. Katphala (Frt.)   Myrica esculenta Buch.-Ham. ex D. Don 
143. Katphala (St. Bk.)   Myrica esculenta  Buch.-Ham. ex D. Don 
144. Kola (Frt. Pulp)   Zizypus jujuba  Lam.  
145. Kola (St. Bk.)    Zizypus jujuba  Lam. 
146. Kosataki (W.P.)   Luffa acutangula  (Linn.) Roxb. 
147. Kumuda (Fl.)    Nymphaea alba  Linn. 
148. Kusa (Rt. St.)    Desmostachya bipinnata  Stapf. 
149. Langali (Rz.)    Gloriosa superba  Linn. 
150. Lasuna (Bulb)   Allium sativum  Linn. 
151. Mahabala (Rt.)   Sida rhombifolia  Linn. 
152. Manjistha (St.)   Rubia cordifolia  Linn. 
153. Marica (Frt.)    Piper nigrum  Linn. 
154. Masaparni (W.P.)   Teramnus labialis  Spreng. 
155. Masura (Sd.)    Lens culinaris  Medic. 
156. Mudga (Sd.)    Phaseolus radiatus  Linn. 
157. Mulaka (Sd.)    Raphanus sativus  Linn. 
158. Munditika (Lf.)   Sphaeranthus indicus  Linn. 
159. Musta (Rz.)    Cyperus rotundus  Linn. 
160. Nagavalli (Lf.)   Piper betle Linn.  CCCXCIX  161. Narikela (Endo.)   Cocos nucifera  Linn. 
162. Nicula (Frt.)    Barringtonia acutangula  (Linn.) Gaertn. 
163. Nili (W.P.)    Indigofera tinctoria  Linn. 
164. Nirgundi (Lf.)   Vitex negundo  Linn. 
165. Padmaka (Ht. Wd.)   Prunus cerasoides D. Don 
166. Patalai (Rt.)    Stereospermum suaveolens DC. 
167. Phalgu (Frt.)    Ficus hispida  Linn. 
168. Phalgu (Rt.)    Ficus hispida  Linn. 
169. Prapunnada (Sd.)   Cassia tora Linn. 
170. Raktacandana (Ht.Wd.) Pterocarpus santalinus  Linn. 
171. Raktapunarnava (Rt.)   Boerhaavia diffusa  Linn. 
172. Ramasitalika (W. P.)   Amaranthus tricolor Linn.  
173. Rasna (Lf.)    Pluchea lanceolata Oliver & Hiem.  
174. Sahacara (W.P.)   Barleria prionitis  Linn. 
175. Sahadevi (W.P.)   Vernonia cinerea  Lees. 
176. Saileya (Lichen-‘Thallus’)  Parmelia perlata  (Huds.) Ach. 
177. Saka (Ht. Wd.)   Tectona grandis Linn. 
178. Sakhotaka (St. Bk.)   Streblus asper  Lour. 
179. Salaparni (Rt.)   Desmodium gangeticum DC. 
180. Sali (Frt.)    Oryza sativa  Linn. 
181. Salmali (St.Bk.)   Bombax ceiba Linn.   
182. Sana (Sd.)    Crotolaria juncea  Linn. 
183. Sara (Rt.)    Saccharum bengalense  Retz. 
184. Sarala (Ht. Wd.)   Pinus roxburghii  Sargent 
185. Sarala (Rt.)    Pinus roxburghii Sargent 
186. Sarsapa (Sd.)    Brassica campestris  Linn. 
187. Satapatrika (Fl.)   Rosa centifolia  Linn. 
188. Simsapa (Ht. Wd.)   Dalbergia sissoo  Roxb. 
189. Simsapa (St. Bk.)   Dalbergia sissoo  Roxb. 
190. Sirisa (St. Bk.)   Albizzia lebbeck  Benth.  
191. Sthauneya (Lf.)   Taxus baccata  Linn. 
192. Surana (Corm.)   Amorphophallus campanulatus (Roxb.) Bl. 
193. Svetacandana (Ht.Wd.)  Santalum album  Linn. 
194. Syonaka (Rt.)    Oroxylum indicum  Vent.  CD 195. Tala (Infl.)    Borassus flabellifer  Linn. 
196. Trivrta (Rt.)    Operculina turpethum  (Linn.) Silva Manso 
197. Tumbini (Frt.)   Lagenaria siceraria  (Mol.) Standl. 
198. Udambara (Frt.)   Ficus glomerata  Roxb. 
199. Usira (Rt.)    Vetiveria zizanioides (Linn.) Nash 
200. Utpala (Fl.)    Nymphaea stellata  Willd. 
 
 
 
 
 
  CDI  MONOGRAPHS PUBLISHED IN AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA OF INDIA 
PART-I, VOL. – IV 
69. Adhaki (Sd.)    Cajanus cajan Linn.     
70. Agaru (Ht. Wd.)   Aquilaria agallocha Roxb.     
71. Aklari (Endm.)   Lodoicea maldivica Pers.     
72. Aparajita (Lf.)   Clitoria ternatea  Linn.     
73. Atmagupta (Rt.)   Mucuna prurita  Hook.     
74. Bilva (St. Bk.)   Aegle marmelos Corr.     
75. Champaka (Fl.)   Michelia champaca Linn.     
76. Cinca (Ft. Pl.)   Tamarindus indica Linn.     
77. Dadima (Fr. Fruit)   Punica granatum Linn.     
78. Dadima (Ft. Rind)   Punica granatum Linn.     
79. Dadima (Lf.)    Punica granatum Linn.     
80. Devadaru (Ht. Wd.)   Cedrus deodara  (Roxb.) Loud.    
81. Dhattura (W.P.)   Datura metel Linn.     
82. Durva (W.P.)    Cynodon dactylon  (Linn.)     
83. Gambhari (St. Bk.)   Gmelina arborea Linn.     
84. Iksu (Rt. Stock)   Saccharum officinarum Linn.    
85. Kadali (Fl.)    Musa paradisiaca Linn.     
86. Karcura (Rz.)    Curcuma zedoaria Rosc.     
87. Kasturilatika (Sd.)   Hibiscus abelmoschus Linn.    
88. Kataka (Sd.)    Strychnos potatorum Linn. f.    
89. Kharjura (Drd. Ft.)   Phoenix dactylifera Linn.     
90. Kharjura (Fr. Ft.)   Phoenix dactylifera Linn.     
91. Krsnasariva (Rt.)   Cryptolepis buchanani Roem. & Schult.   
92. Kunduru (Exud.)   Boswellia serrata Roxb.      
93. Kunkuma (Sty. & Stg.)  Crocus sativus Linn.      
94. Kusmanda (Ft.)   Benincasa hispida (Thunb.) Cogn.   
95. Madayanti (Lf.)   Lawsonia inermis Linn.     
96. Mahanimba (St. Bk.)  Melia azedarach Linn.      
97. Mandukaparni (W.P.)  Centella asiatica (Linn.) Urban     
98. Mayakku (Gall)   Quercus infectoria Oliv.    
99. Mudgaparni (W.P.)   Vigna trilobata (Linn.) Verdc.    
100. Munditika (W.P.)   Sphaeranthus indicus Linn.    
101. Nayagrodha Jata  (Ar. Rt.)   Ficus bengalensis Linn.      CDII  102. Nimbu (Fr. Ft.)   Citrus limon (Linn.) Burm. f.     
103. Nirgundi (Rt.)    Vitex negundo Linn.     
104. Palasa (Fl.)    Butea monosperma (Lam.) Kuntze.    
105. Palasa (Gum)   Butea monosperma (Lam.) Kuntze.    
106. Palasa (Sd.)    Butea monosperma (Lam.) Kuntze.    
107. Parpata (W.P.)   Fumaria parviflora Lam.     
108. Patalai (St. Bk.)   Stereospermum chelonoides (L.F.)DC.   
109. Pattanga (Ht. Wd.)   Caesaplinia sappan Linn.     
110. Pippali (Ft.)    Piper longum Linn.     
111. Plaksa (Ft.)    Ficus lacor Buch . – Ham.     
112. Priyala (St. Bk.)   Buchanania lanzan Spreng.    
113. Priyangu (Fruit)   Callicarpa macrophylla Vahl.    
114. Prsniparni (W.P.)   Uraria picta Desv.      
115. Puskara (Rt.)    Inula racemosa Hook. f.    
116. Rudraksa (Sd.)   Elaeocarpus sphaericus Gaertn. K. Schum  
117. Saraja (Exud.)    Vateria indica Linn.     
118. Satavari (Rt.)    Asparagus recemosus Willd.    
119. Sigru (Rt. Bk.)   Moringa oleifera Lam.      
120. Sigru (Sd.)    Moringa oleifera Lam.      
121. Sigru (St. Bk)    Moringa oleifera Lam.     
122. Srngataka (Drd.Sd)   Trapa natans Linn.      
123. Sruvavrksa (Lf.)   Flacourtia indica Merr.     
124. Sruvavrksa (St. Bk)   Flacourtia indica Merr.     
125. Talamuli (Rz.)   Curculigo orchioides Gaertn.    
126. Talisa (Drd. Lf.)   Abies webbiana Lindl.     
127. Tila (Sd.)    Sesamum indicum Linn.      
128. Tulasi (Sd.)    Ocimum sanctum Linn.     
129. Tumburu (Ft.)  Zanthoxylum armatum DC.     
130. Utingana (Sd.)   Blepharis persica (Burm.f.) O. Kuntze.    
131. Varahi (Rz.)    Dioscorea bulbifera Linn.     
132. Varsabhu (Rt.)   Trianthema portulacastrum Linn.    
133. Vasa (Rt.)    Adhatoda zeylanica Medic.    
134. Visamusti (Sd.)   Strychnos nux-vomica Linn.    
135. Vrscikalli (W.P.)   Tragia involucrata Linn.   CDIII  136. Yava (W.P.)   Hordeum vulgare Linn.     
 
 
PHARMACOPOEIAL MONOGRAPHS TO BE PUBLISHED IN AYURVEDIC 
PHARMACOPOEIA OF INDIA PART-I, VOL.-V 
 
1. Amra Haridra (Rz.)   Curcuma amada Roxb.  
2. Anisoon (Fr.)   Pimpinelia anisum Linn.  
3. Ankola (Lf.)   Alangium  salviifolium (Linn.f.) Wang.  
4. Aragvadha (St.Bk.)   Cassia fistula Linn.  
5. Asphota (Rt.)   Vallaris solanacea Kuntze  
6. Bastantri (Rt.)   Argyreia nervosa (Burm.f.) Boj.  
7. Bhurja (St.Bk.)   Betula utilis D.Don  
8. Canda (Rt.)   Angelica archangelica Linn.  
9. Coraka (Rt. &Rt.Stock)   Angelica glauca Edgw.  
10. Darbha (Rt.)   Imperata cylindrica (Linn.) Beauv.  
11. Dhanvayasa (Wh.Pl.)   Fagonia cretica Linn.  
12. Dravanti (Sd.)   Jatropha glandulifera Roxb.  
13. Dugdhika (Wh.Pl.)   Euphorbia prostrata W. Ait.  
14. Elavaluka (Sd.)   Prunus avium Linn.f.  
15. Gandira (Rt.)   Coleus forskohlii Briq.  
16. Gavedhuka (Rt.)   Coix lachryma-jobi Linn.  
17. Ghonta (Fr.)   Ziziphus xylopyrus Willd.  
18. Gundrah (Rz. & Rt.)   Typha australis Schum. and Thonn.  
19. Himsra (Rt.)   Capparis spinosa Linn.  
20. Hingupatri (Lf.)   Ferula jaeschkeana Vatke  
21. Itkata (Rt.)   Sesbania bispinosa W.F.Wight  
22. Itkata (St.)   Sesbania bispinosa W.F.Wight  
23. Jalpippalika (Wh.Pl.)   Phyla nodiflora Greene  
24. Jivak (Pseudo-bulb)   Malaxis acuminata D.Don  
25. Kadara (Ht. Wd.)   Acacia suma Buch.-Ham.   
26.Kakajangha (Sd.)   Peristrophe bicalyculata (Retz.) Nees  
27. Kakanaja (Fr.)   Physalis alkekengi Linn.  
28. Kapitan (St.Bk.)   Thespesia populnea (L.) Soland. ex Correa  
29. Karkash (Rt.)   Momordica dioica Roxb. ex Willd.  
30. Karnasphota (Sd.)   Cardiospermum halicacabum Linn.  
31. Karnasphota (Rt.)   Cardiospermum halicacabum Linn.  
32. Kattrna (Wh.Pl.)   Cymbopogon citratus (DC.) Stapf  
33. Kebuka (Rz.)   Costus speciosus (Koerning ex Retz.) Smith.  
34. Khaskhas (Sd.)   Papaver somniferum Linn.  
35. Khatmi (Rt.)   Althaea officinalis Linn.  
36. Khatmi (Sd.)   Althaea officinalis Linn.  
37. Khubkalan (Sd.)   Sisymbrium irio Linn.  
38. Kodrava (Grain)   Paspalum scrobiculatum Linn.  
39. Ksirakakoli (Bulb)   Fritillaria roylei Hook.   
40. Kshiravidari (Rt.)   Ipomoea digitata Linn.  
41. Kulanjan (Rz.)   Alpinia galanga Willd.  
42. Kumbhikah (Sd.)   Careya arborea Roxb.  
43. Latakaranja (Sd.)   Caesalpinia bonduc (Linn.) Roxb.  
44. Lavaliphala (Fr.)   Phyllanthus acidus (Linn.) Skeels   CDIV  45. Madhulika (Rt.)   Eleusine corocana (L.) Gaertn.  
46. Mahameda (Rz.&Rt.)   Polygonatum cirrhifolium Royle  
47. Mahdusnuhi (Tub.Rt.)   Smilax china Linn.  
48. Maramanjal (Rt. & St.)  Coscinium fenestratum (Gaertn.) Colebr.  
49. Medasakah (St.Bk.)   Litsea chinensis Lam.  
50. Medasakah (Wd.)   Litsea chinensis Lam.  
51. Mesasrngi (Lf.)   Gymnema sylvestre R.Br.  
52. Mesasrngi (Rt.)   Gymnema sylvestre R.Br.  
53. Nandi (Rt.)   Ficus arnottiana Miq.  
54. Nilajhintika (Rt.)   Barleria strigosa Willd.  
55. Nimba (Rt.Bk.)   Azadirachta indica A.Juss.  
56. Nimba (Fl.)   Azadirachta indica A.Juss.  
57. Nimba (Fr.)   Azadirachta indica A.Juss.  
58. Palas (Sd.)   Butea monosperma (Lam.) Kuntze  
59. Palas (Fl.)   Butea monosperma (Lam.) Kuntze  
60. Parasikayavani (Sd.)   Hyoscyamus niger Linn.  
61. Pattura (Wh.Pl.)   Aerva lanata (Linn.) Juss.  
62. Pilu (Fr.)   Salvadora persica Linn.  
63. Pilu (Lf.)   Salvadora persica Linn.  
64. Pilu (Rt.Bk.)   Salvadora persica Linn.  
65. Potagala (Rt.)   Typha elephantina Roxb.  
66. Pudina (Aerial Part)   Mentha viridis Linn.  
67. Pullani (Lf.)   Calycopteris floribunda Lam.  
68. Pullani (Rt.)   Calycopteris floribunda Lam.  
69. Pullani (St.)   Calycopteris floribunda Lam.  
70. Putikaranjah (St.Bk.)   Caesalpinia crista Linn.  
71. Renuka (Fr.)   Vitex negundo Linn.  
72. Riddhi (Tuber)   Habenaria intermedia D.Don  
73. Rohisa (Wh.Pl.)   Cymbopogon martinii (Roxb.) Wats  
74. Rumimustagi (Resin)   Pistacia lentiscus Linn.  
75. Sarala (Exudate)   Pinus roxburghii Sargent  
76. Sarpagandha (Rt.)   Rauwolfia serpentina (Linn.) Benth. ex Kurz  
77. Svetapunarnava (Rt.)   Boerhaavia verticillata Poir.  
78. Tailaparna (Lf.)   Eucalyptus globulus Labill.  
79. Tinisha (Wd.)   Ougeinia oojeinensis (Roxb.) Hochr.  
80. Tintidika (Aerial Part)   Rhus  parviflora  Roxb.  
81. Trapusa (Sd.)   Cucumis sativus Linn.  
82. Tuni (St.Bk.)   Cedrela toona Roxb.  
83. Vanda (Lf.)   Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh.   
84. Vanda (St.)   Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh.  
85. Vanda (Aerial Rt.)   Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh.  
86. Vanda (Fl.)   Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh.  
87. Vanda (Fr.)   Dendrophthoe falcata (Linn.f.) Ettingsh.  
88. Vanyajiraka (Fr.)   Centratherum anthelminticum (L.) Kuntze  
89. Vidarikand (Tuber)   Pueraria tuberosa DC.  
90. Virala (St.Bk.)   Diospyros exsculpta Buch.-Ham.  
91. Visala (Rt.)   Trichosanthes bracteata (Lam.) Voigt  
92. Vyaghranakhi (Fr.)   Capparis horrida Linn.  
 
 
  CDV  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CDVI  APPENDIX-7 
 
7.1. CLASSICAL AYURVEDIC REFERENCES 
 
+É®hªÉ ºÉÚ®hÉ (BÉExn) 
 
´ÉXÉÉhbªÉÉ& BÉE−ÉÇàÉÉjÉÉªÉÉ& BÉEãBÉEÆ nvªÉÉÉÊn´ÉäÉÎ−]iÉàÉ Â 
                      ÉÊxÉÉÊMÉãÉäcÉÉÊ®hÉÉ ÉÊxÉiªÉÆ =n®Bª ÉÉÉÊvÉ ¶ÉÉxiÉªÉä ** 
                      ´ÉXÉÉhbÉÒÉÊxÉ ‘´ÉxÉºÉÚ®hÉä ’ ÉÊiÉãÉBÉEä 
                                                        (£ÉÉ0 ÉÊàÉgÉ) 
                                                        (ÉÊxÉ0 +ÉÉ0 {Éß0 699) 
  
 
+ÉÉÎºlÉ¶ÉßÆJÉãÉÉ (´ÉÉªÉ´ÉÉÒªÉ £ÉÉMÉ) 
 
´ÉXÉ´ÉããÉÉÒ ºÉ®É °ôFÉÉ BÉßEÉÊàÉnÖxÉÉÇàÉ xÉÉÉÊ¶ÉxÉÉÒ ** 1594 ** 
                         nÉÒ{ÉxªÉÖ−hÉÉ ÉÊ´É{ÉÉBÉEä SÉ ºªÉÉpÉÒ ´Éß−ªÉÉ ¤ÉãÉ|ÉnÉ  * 
                         +ÉÉÎºlÉºÉÆvÉÉxÉVÉxÉxÉÉÒ ´ÉÉiÉ ¶ãÉä−àÉc®É MÉÖâó& ** 1595 ** 
                                                   (BÉEè ÉÊxÉ0 +ÉÉè−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
+ÉÉÎºlÉºÉÆcÉ®BÉE& |ÉÉäBÉDiÉÉä ´ÉÉiÉ¶ãÉä−àÉc®Éä%ÉÎºlÉªÉÖBÉEÂ  ** 226 ** 
                         =−hÉ& ºÉ®& BÉßEÉÊàÉPxÉ¶SÉnÖxÉÉ ÇàÉPxÉÉä%ÉÊFÉ®ÉäMÉÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ  *  
âóFÉ& º´ÉÉnÖãÉÇPÉÖ´ÉÇß−ªÉ& {ÉÉSÉxÉ& ÉÊ{ÉkÉãÉ& ºàÉßiÉ& ** 227 ** 
                                  (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, MÉ ÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
                       
             ´ÉXÉ´ÉããÉÉÒºÉ®É°ôFÉÉBÉßEÉÊàÉnÖxÉÉÇàÉxÉÉÇÉÊ¶ÉxÉÉÒ * 
                      nÉÒ{ÉxªÉÖ−hÉÉÉÊ´É{ÉÉBÉEä%àãÉÉº´ÉÉ uÉÒ´Éß−ªÉÉ¤ÉãÉ|ÉnÉ  ** 
                      +É¶ÉÇºÉÉÆiÉÖÉÊ´É¶Éä−ÉähÉÉÊciÉÉSÉè´ÉÉ ÉÎMxÉnÉÒ{ÉxÉÉÒ * 
                      SÉiÉÖvÉÉÇ®ÉBÉEÉhb´ÉããÉÉÒ£ÉÚiÉÉä{Ép ´É¶ÉÚãÉcÉ  ** 
                      +ÉiªÉÖ−hÉÉ%%vàÉÉxÉ´ÉÉiÉÉÆ¶SÉÉÊiÉ ÉÊàÉ®Æ´ÉÉiÉ®BÉDiÉBÉEàÉÂ * 
                      +É{ÉºàÉÉ®Æ´ÉÉiÉ®ÉäMÉÆxÉÉ¶ÉªÉäÉÊnÉÊi ÉBÉEÉÒÉÊkÉÇiÉàÉÂ * 
                                         (ÉÊxÉ0 ®0) 
                      
      °ôFÉÉä−hÉÉàÉvÉÖ®É´ÉÉiÉBÉßEàªÉ¶ÉÇ&BÉE{ÉExÉÉÉÊ¶ÉxÉÉÒ  ** 
                       BÉEÉhb´ÉããÉÉÒiÉÖBÉE]ÖBÉEÉÉÊiÉBÉDiÉ ÉSÉÉä−hÉÉºÉ®ÉàÉiÉÉ  * 
                       ÉÊ{ÉkÉãÉÉSÉBÉE{ÉEÆMÉÖãàÉÆãÉÚiÉÉÆnÖ− ]µÉhÉÆiÉlÉÉ * 
                       {ãÉÉÒcÉän®ÉÉÎMxÉàÉÉÆtÉªÉÉäÉÊxÉ¶ÉÚãÉÆ´ ÉÉiÉÆSÉxÉÉ¶ÉªÉäiÉÂ  * 
                       àÉãÉºiÉà£Éc®ÉSÉè´ÉBÉEÉÒÉÌkÉiÉÉàÉÖÉÊxÉ ÉÊ£É&{ÉÖ®É ** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  CDVII  £ÉÚiÉBÉEä¶ÉÉÒ ({ÉEãÉàÉÂ) 
 
                      àÉÉÆºÉÉÒuªÉÆ  BÉE−ÉÉªÉÆ SÉ ´ÉhªÉÈ É Ê{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcàÉÂ  * 
                      ®FÉÉäPxÉÆ SÉ ºÉÖMÉÉÎxvÉ ºªÉÉnÂ ´ÉÉ iÉPxÉÆ BÉEä¶ªÉàÉÖkÉàÉàÉÂ  ** 46 ** 
                                                        (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0 SÉxnxÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      àÉÖ®É ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ BÉE]Ö& ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ BÉE −ÉÉªÉÉ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉØiÉÂ * 
                      `´ÉÉºÉßÉÎM´É−ÉnÉcÉÉÊkÉ-§ÉàÉàÉÚSUÉÇiÉßF ÉÉ{ÉcÉ ** 132 ** 
                                                        (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, SÉxnxÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      ÉÊuiÉÉÒªÉÉ MÉxvÉàÉÉÆºÉÉÒ SÉ BÉEä¶ÉÉ Ò £ÉÚiÉVÉ]É ºàÉßiÉÉ * 
ÉÊ{É¶ÉÉSÉÉÒ {ÉÚiÉxÉÉ SÉè´É £ÉÚiÉBÉEä¶ÉÉÒ SÉ ãÉÉäàÉ¶ÉÉ ** 93 ** 
 
                      MÉxvÉàÉÉÆºÉÉÒ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ BÉE{É EBÉEh~ÉàÉªÉÉ{ÉcÉ * 
                      ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉc®É ´ÉhªÉÉÇ ÉÊ´É−É£ÉÚi ÉV´É®É{ÉcÉ ** 94 ** 
                                                      (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0 SÉxnxÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ)  
 
 
                                                  £ ÉÚiÉBÉEä¶ÉÉÒ (|ÉBÉExn) 
 
                      MÉÉäãÉÉäàÉÉÒ SÉÉVÉãÉÉäàÉÉÒ SÉ £ÉÚiÉBÉ Eä¶ÉÉÒ VÉ®ÉiÉlÉÉ * 
+ÉÉÎºàÉxÉÂ ´ÉMÉæ ÉÊ£É−ÉBÉEÂ BÉÖEªÉÉÇkÉèãÉÉÉÊxÉ SÉ PÉßiÉÉÉÊxÉ SÉ  * 
A−É ºÉ´ÉÇÉÊ´ÉBÉEÉ®ÉÆºiÉÖ àÉÉxÉºÉÉxÉ{É®ÉÉÊVÉiÉ& ** 47 ** 
                                              (ºÉÖ0 =0 60) 
 
                      ºÉÖ®ºÉªÉÖMÉ{ÉEÉÊhÉVVÉÆ BÉEÉãÉàÉÉãÉÉ  ÉÊ´ÉbMÉ½Æ 
                      JÉ®¤ÉÖºÉ´Éß−ÉBÉEhÉÉÔBÉE]{ÉEãÉÆ BÉEÉ ºÉàÉnÇ& * 
                      FÉ´ÉBÉEºÉ®ÉÊºÉ £ÉÉMÉbÉÔBÉEÉàÉÇÖBÉ EÉ& BÉEÉBÉEàÉÉSÉÉÒ 
                      BÉÖEãÉcãÉÉÊ´É−ÉàÉÖ−]ÉÒ £ÉÚºiÉßhÉÉä £ ÉÚiÉBÉEä¶ÉÉÒ ** 30 ** 
                      ºÉÖ®ºÉÉÉÊnMÉÇhÉ& `ãÉä−àÉàÉän& BÉß EÉÊàÉÉÊxÉ−ÉÚnxÉ& 
                      |ÉÉÊiÉ¶ªÉÉªÉ°ôÉÊSÉ `´ÉÉºÉBÉEÉºÉPxÉ Éä µÉhÉ¶ÉÉävÉxÉ& ** 31 ** 
                      £ÉÚiÉBÉEä¶ÉÉÒ ÉÊxÉMÉÇÖhbÉÒ(+ÉÉ®. cäàÉ ÉÉÊp) ;  £ÉÚiÉBÉEä¶ÉÉÒ àÉÉÆºÉÉÒ (+É°ôhÉÅÉä) 
                                 (+É0 c0 ºÉÚ0 15) 
 
                      ÉÊcMÉÖb. BªÉÉä−ÉÉãÉxÉä{ÉÉãÉÉÒ ãÉ ¶ÉÖxÉÉBÉEÇVÉ]ÉVÉ]É& 
                      +ÉVÉãÉÉäàÉÉÒ ºÉMÉÉäãÉÉàÉÉÒ £ÉÚiÉBÉEä¶ ÉÉÒ ´ÉSÉÉ ãÉiÉÉ ** 2 ** 
                      |ÉªÉÉäMÉÉ%ªÉÆ   OÉcÉäxàÉÉnÉxÉÂ ºÉÉ{ÉºàÉÉ®É\¶ÉàÉÆ xÉªÉäiÉÂ 
                                                 (+ É0 ¿0 =0 5) 
 
¤ÉÉÒVÉ{ÉjÉÉ (ºÉÆ0 ´É0) 
 
    cÆºÉ{ÉÉnÉÒ ÉÊcàÉÉ MÉÖ´ÉÉÔ ®Éä{ÉhÉÉÒ cÉÎxiÉ ¶ÉÉäÉÊhÉiÉàÉÂ ** 767 ** 
                     nÉcÉiÉÉÒºÉÉ®ÉÊ´ÉºÉ{ÉÇãÉÚiÉÉ£ÉÚiÉÉÊ´É −ÉµÉhÉÉxÉÂ * 
                                                      (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
  CDVIII                        cÆºÉ{ÉÉnÉÒ MÉÖâó& ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ cÉÎxiÉ ® BÉDiÉÉÊ´É−ÉµÉhÉÉxÉÂ * 
                      ÉÊ´ÉºÉ{ÉÇnÉcÉiÉÉÒºÉÉ®ãÉÚiÉÉ£ÉÚiÉÉ ÉÎMxÉ®ÉäÉÊchÉÉÒ& ** 256 ** 
                                                            (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, MÉÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
 
ÉÊ¤Éà¤ÉÉÒ ({ÉjÉàÉÂ) 
 
                      ÉÊ¤Éà¤ÉÉÒ º´ÉÉuÉÒ ®ºÉä {ÉÉBÉEä ´ÉÉàÉ xªÉ¶ãÉä−àÉãÉÉ VÉªÉäiÉÂ * 
                      ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉFÉªÉ`´ÉÉºÉ{ÉÉhbÖ`´ÉªÉl ÉÖBÉEÉàÉãÉÉ&  ** 583 ** 
                      ¶ÉÉBÉEÆ iÉÖÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ BÉE− ÉÉªÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ  * 
                      ºÉÆOÉÉÉÊc BÉE]ÖBÉEÆ {ÉÉBÉEä ´ÉÉiÉã ÉÆ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ  ** 584 ** 
                      ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ |ÉºÉÚxÉÆ ÉÊ{ÉkÉxPÉÆ iÉi{É ®Æ BÉEÉàÉãÉÉ{ÉcàÉÂ * 
                      ÉÊ¤Éà¤ÉÉÒ{ÉEãÉÆ º´ÉÉnÖ ¶ÉÉÒiÉÆ ºiÉà£Éx ÉÆ ãÉäJÉxÉÆ MÉÖâó ** 585 ** 
                      ÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ òqnÉc¶ÉÉä{ÉEPxÉÆ ´ÉÉiÉÉvàÉÉxÉÉÊ´É¤ÉxvÉBÉßEiÉÂ * 
                                                     (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0 +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                      ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉiÉÖhbÉÒ iÉÖ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉJªÉÉ BÉE]ÖBÉEÉ BÉE]ÖiÉÖÉÎhbBÉEÉ * 
                      ÉÊ¤Éà¤ÉÉÒ SÉ BÉE]ÖÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉÉÊn iÉÖÉÎh b {ÉªÉÉÇªÉMÉÉ SÉ ºÉÉ ** 
                                         (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0)  
 
                      BÉE]ÖiÉÖhbÉÒ BÉE]ÖÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉÉ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ ÉkÉÉÊ´É−ÉÉ{ÉcÉ * 
                      +É®ÉäSÉBÉEÉ òÉÊ{ÉkÉPxÉÉÒ ºÉnÉ {ÉlªÉÉ SÉ ®ÉäSÉxÉÉÒ **  
                                        (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
 
                      ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉiÉÖhbÉÒ ´ÉÉÉÎxiÉBÉE®É ÉÊ{É kÉ®BÉDiÉÉÊ´ÉBÉEÉ®xÉÖiÉÂ * 
                      BÉE{ÉE{ÉÉhbÖc®É |ÉÉäBÉDiÉÉ àÉÖÉÉÊxÉÉ Ê£É`SÉ®BÉEÉÉÊnÉÊ£É& ** 
                      {ÉEãÉàÉºªÉÉ MÉÖâóÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉÆ ´ÉÉàÉBÉ EÆ ´ÉÉiÉBÉEÉä{ÉxÉàÉÂ * 
                      ¶ÉÉä{ÉEâóÉÎM´É−ÉÉÊ{ÉkÉPxÉÆ ®BÉDiÉâó BÉDBÉE{ÉE{ÉÉhbÖc® ** 
                                        (ÉÊxÉ0 ®0) 
 
ÉÊ¤ÉÉÎà¤ÉBÉEÉ àÉvÉÖ®É ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉV´É®ÉxÉÂ c®äiÉÂ * 
{ÉEãÉàÉºªÉÉ MÉÖâó& º´ÉÉnÖ& ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ ãÉäJÉxÉÆ àÉiÉàÉÂ ** 
àÉãÉºiÉà£ÉBÉE®Æ âóSªÉÆ BÉEÉºÉg´ÉÉºÉc®Æ àÉiÉàÉÂ  * 
+ÉºªÉ {ÉhÉÉæ–´ÉÉ ¶ÉÉJÉÉ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉ àÉvÉÖ®É ãÉPÉÖ&  ** 
OÉÉcBÉEÉ iÉÖ´É®É ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ {ÉÉBÉEä BÉE]Â´ÉÉÒ SÉ ´ÉÉiÉãÉÉ  * 
BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉc®É |ÉÉäBÉDiÉÉ {ÉÚ´Éê´ÉètÉ´É®è& º{ÉÖE]àÉÂ ** 
                      àÉÚãÉàÉºªÉ ÉÊcàÉÆ àÉäcxÉÉ¶ÉxÉÆ vÉÉiÉÖ´É rÇBÉEàÉÂ * 
              ¤ÉÉÎºiÉnÉcc®Æ §ÉÉÉÎxiÉ´ÉÉÉÎxiÉxÉÉ¶ÉBÉE®Æ àÉ iÉàÉÂ ** (º´É0) ** 
                                                           (<0 àÉä0 {ãÉÄ0, BÉEÉä^ÉBÉDBÉEãÉ) 
 
 
 
 
 
        ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉiÉÖhbÉÒ iÉÖ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉJªÉÉ BÉE]ÖBÉEÉ BÉE]ÖiÉÖÉ ÎhbBÉEÉ *  CDIX          ÉÊ¤Éà¤ÉÉÒ SÉ BÉE]ÖÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉÉÊn iÉÖÉÎhb {ÉªÉÉÇªÉMÉÉ S É ºÉÉ ** 
                                                 (® É0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
 
 BÉE]ÖiÉÖhbÉÒ BÉE]ÖÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉÉ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉÉÊ´É−ÉÉ{ÉcÉ * 
 +É®ÉäSÉBÉEÉ òÉÊ{ÉkÉQÉÉÒ ºÉnÉ {ÉlªÉÉ SÉ ®ÉäSÉxÉÉÒ **  
                                                  ( ®É0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
 
ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉiÉÖhbÉÒ ´ÉÉÉÎxiÉBÉE®É ÉÊ{ÉkÉ®BÉDiÉÉÊ´ÉBÉEÉ®xÉÖiÉÂ * 
BÉE{ÉE{ÉÉhbÖc®É |ÉÉäBÉDiÉÉ àÉÖÉÉÊxÉ`SÉ®BÉEÉÉÊnÉÊ£É& ** 
{ÉEãÉàÉºªÉÉ MÉÖâóÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉÆ ´ÉÉàÉBÉEÆ ´ÉÉiÉBÉEÉä{ÉxÉàÉÂ * 
¶ÉÉä{ÉEâóÉÎM´É−ÉÉÊ{ÉkÉPxÉÆ ®BÉDiÉâóBÉDBÉE{ÉE{ÉÉhbÖc® ** 
                                                   (ÉÊxÉ0 ®0) 
 
ÉÊ¤ÉÉÎà¤ÉBÉEÉ àÉvÉÖ®É ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉV´É®ÉxÉÂ c®äiÉÂ * 
{ÉEãÉàÉºªÉÉ MÉÖâó& º´ÉÉnÖ& ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ ãÉäJÉxÉÆ àÉiÉàÉÂ ** 
                         àÉãÉºiÉà£ÉBÉE®Æ âóSªÉÆ BÉEÉºÉ`´É ÉºÉc®Æ àÉiÉàÉÂ  * 
+ÉºªÉ {ÉhÉÉæ–´ÉÉ ¶ÉÉJÉÉ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉ àÉvÉÖ®É ãÉPÉÖ&  ** 
OÉÉcBÉEÉ iÉÖ´É®É ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ {ÉÉBÉEä BÉE]Â´ÉÉÒ SÉ ´ÉÉiÉãÉÉ  * 
BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉc®É |ÉÉäBÉDiÉÉ {ÉÚ´Éè´ÉètÉ´É®è& º{ÉÖE]àÉÂ ** 
                         àÉÚãÉàÉºªÉ ÉÊcàÉÆ àÉäcxÉÉ¶ÉxÉÆ vÉÉi ÉÖ´ÉrÇBÉEàÉÂ * 
¤ÉÉÎºiÉnÉcc®Æ §ÉÉÉÎxiÉ´ÉÉÉÎxiÉxÉÉ¶ÉBÉE®Æ àÉiÉàÉÂ  ** (º´É0) ** 
                                                               (<Æ0 àÉä0 {ãÉÄ0, BÉEÉä^ÉBÉDBÉEãÉ ) 
 
 
¤ÉßciÉÂ nÖÉÎMvÉBÉEÉ (ºÉÆ0´É0) 
 
         nÖÉÎMvÉBÉEÉä−hÉÉ MÉÖ°ô °ôFÉÉ ´ÉÉiÉãÉÉ MÉ£ÉÇBÉEÉÉÊ ®hÉÉÒ ** 275 ** 
         º´ÉÉnÖFÉÉÒ®É BÉE]ÖÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉÉ ºÉß−]àÉÚjÉÉ àÉãÉÉ{Éc É * 
         º´ÉÉnÖÉÊ´É−]ÉÎà£ÉxÉÉÒ ´Éß−ªÉÉ BÉE{ÉEBÉÖE−~ÉÊµÉEÉÊàÉ|É hÉÖiÉÂ ** 276 ** 
                      (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, MÉÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ)  
 
¤ÉßciÉÉÒ (ºÉÆ.´É.) 
 
         ºÉÉÉÊ®´ÉäFÉÖàÉÚãÉàÉvÉÖBÉEÉÊ{É{{ÉãÉÉÒpÉFÉÉÉÊ´ÉnÉ®ÉÒB ÉEè¶ªÉÇcÆºÉ{ÉÉnÉÒ¤ÉßciÉÉÒBÉEh]ÉÊ®BÉEÉ * 
         <ÉÊiÉ n¶ÉäàÉÉÉÊxÉ BÉEh~ªÉÉÉÊxÉ £É´ÉÉÎxiÉ ** 9 ** 
         ¶É]ÉÒ{ÉÖ−BÉE®àÉÚãÉ¤Én®¤ÉÉÒVÉBÉEh]BÉEÉÉÊ®BÉEÉ¤ÉßciÉ ÉÒ...<ÉÊiÉ n¶ÉäàÉÉÉÊxÉ * 
         ÉÊcBÉDBÉEÉÉÊxÉOÉchÉÉÉÊxÉ £É´ÉÉÎxiÉ ** 30 ** 
                (SÉ0ºÉÚ0 4) 
         ÉËºÉÉÊcBÉEÉ BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉPxÉÉÒ `´ÉÉºÉ¶ÉÚãÉV´É®É{ÉcÉ * 
         UÉÌpØpÉäMÉàÉxnÉÉÎMxÉàÉÉàÉnÉä−ÉÉÆ`SÉ xÉÉ¶ÉªÉäiÉÂ ** 64 ** 
               (vÉ0ÉÊxÉ0, MÉÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ) 
 
         
                         ¤ÉßciÉÉÒ BÉE]ÖBÉEÉ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ º ÉÉä−hÉÉ ´ÉÉiÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcÉ ** 50 **  
          nÉÒ{ÉxÉÉÒ {ÉÉSÉxÉÉÒ ØtÉÉ OÉÉÉÊchÉÉÒ V´É®BÉÖE−~xÉ ÖiÉÂ *  CDX           `´ÉÉºÉÉºªÉàÉãÉ´Éè®ºªÉBÉEÉºÉÉ®ÉäSÉBÉE¶ÉÚãÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ ** 51 ** 
                (BÉEè0ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                ÉÊ´ÉYÉäªÉÉ ¶´ÉäiÉ¤ÉßciÉÉÒ ´ÉÉiÉ¶ãÉä−àÉÉÊ´É xÉÉ¶ÉxÉÉÒ * 
          âóSªÉÉ SÉÉ\VÉxÉªÉÉäMÉäxÉ xÉÉxÉÉxÉäjÉÉàÉªÉÉ{Éc É  ** 29 ** 
                   (®É0ÉÊxÉ0, ¶ÉiÉÉ†ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
          BÉE]ÖÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ%%ºªÉ´Éè®ºªÉàÉãÉÉ®ÉäSÉBÉExÉÉÉÊ¶ÉxÉ ÉÒ * 
          =−hÉÉ BÉÖE−~V´É®`´ÉÉºÉ¶ÉÚãÉBÉEÉºÉÉÉÎMxÉàÉÉxtÉÉÊVÉ iÉÂ ** 37 ** 
                 (£ÉÉ0|É0ÉÊxÉ0, MÉÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
          ¤ÉßciÉÉÒBÉEh]BÉEÉÉÊ®BÉEÉBÉÖE]VÉ{ÉEãÉ{ÉÉ~É àÉvÉÖBÉ EÆ SÉäÉÊiÉ 
          {ÉÉSÉxÉÉÒªÉÉä ¤ÉßciªÉÉÉÊnMÉÇhÉ& ÉÊ{ÉkÉàÉÉÊxÉãÉÉ{ Éc& 
          BÉE{ÉEÉ®ÉäSÉBÉEØpÉäMÉàÉÚjÉBÉßESUÅâóVÉÉ{Éc& * 
             (ºÉÖ0ºÉÚ0 38* 31 * 32) 
 
 
       
BÉE{ÉEÉ òÉÊ{ÉkÉ{ÉÆºi´ÉQÉÉ`SÉhÉBÉEÉ ´ÉÉiÉãÉÉ ÉÊcàÉÉ& ** 89 ** 
                      ãÉPÉ´ÉÉä £É−]SÉhBÉEÉ +ÉÉàÉBÉDãÉàÉc ®É& {É®É& * 
UÉÌncxÉÉ ®ÉäSÉxÉÉ& ¶ÉÖ−BÉEÉºiÉäVÉÉä´ÉÉÒªÉÇ¤ÉãÉ|ÉnÉ& ** 90 ** 
                                                                  (PÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, ºÉÖ´ÉhÉÉÇÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      SÉhÉBÉEÉä ´ÉÉiÉãÉÉä °ôFÉÉä ÉÊ´É−]à£É ÉÒ {ÉÆºi´ÉBÉEÉ®BÉE& * 
ºÉBÉE−ÉÉªÉÉä ãÉPÉÖ& ¶ÉÉÒiÉ& {ÉÉÒkÉ òBÉE{ÉExÉÉ¶ÉxÉ& ** 70 ** 
                                                               (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0, vÉÉxªÉ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      SÉhÉBÉEÉä àÉvÉÖ®Éä °ôFÉÉä àÉäcÉÊVÉiÉÂ ´ ÉÉiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉßEiÉÂ * 
                nÉÒÉÎ{iÉ´ÉhÉÇBÉE®Éä ¤ÉãªÉÉä °ôSªÉ`SÉÉvàÉÉx ÉBÉEÉ®BÉE& ** 85 ** 
                                                                 (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, ¶ÉÉãªÉÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      SÉhÉBÉE& ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉä °ôFÉ& ÉÊ{ÉkÉ®B ÉDiÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{Éc& * 
ãÉPÉÖ& BÉE−ÉÉªÉÉä ÉÊ´É−]à£ÉÉÒ ´ÉÉiÉãÉÉä V´É®xÉÉ¶ÉxÉ& ** 53 ** 
                                                                 (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, vÉÉxªÉ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                        nÉâócÉÊ®pÉ ({ÉEãÉàÉÂ ) 
 
                     àÉÖºiÉBÉÖE~cÉÊ®pÉnÉâócÉÊ®pÉ....... ...ÉÊSÉjÉBÉEÉÊSÉ®ÉÊ¤Éã´ÉcèàÉ´ÉiªÉ 
        <ÉÊiÉ n¶ÉäàÉÉÉÊxÉ ãÉäJÉxÉÉÒªÉÉÉÊxÉ £É´ÉÉÎxiÉ ** 3 ** 
                                            (SÉ0 ºÉ Ú0 4) 
 
                     cÉÊ®pÉnÉâócÉÊ®pÉ.............. .àÉvÉÖBÉEÆ SÉäÉÊiÉ ** 27 ** 
                     AiÉÉè ´ÉSÉÉcÉÊ®pÉnÉÒ MÉhÉÉè ºiÉxª ÉÉÊ´É¶ÉÉävÉxÉÉè * 
                     +ÉÉàÉÉÉÊiÉºÉÉ®¶ÉàÉxÉÉä ÉÊ´É¶ÉäÉÉqÉä É{ÉÉSÉxÉÉè ** 28 ** 
                                            (ºÉÖ0 ºÉ Ú0 38)  CDXI   
                     ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ nÉâócÉÊ®pÉ ºªÉÉnÂ âóFÉ ÉähÉÉ µÉhÉàÉäcÉÊVÉiÉÂ * 
                     BÉEhÉÇxÉäjÉàÉÖJÉÉänÂ £ÉÚiÉÉÆ âóVÉÆ BÉEh bÚÆ SÉ xÉÉ¶ÉªÉäiÉÂ ** 59 ** 
                                       (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, M ÉÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                      iÉunÂ nÉ´ÉÉÔ ÉÊ´É¶ÉäÉähÉ BÉEhÉÇxÉäjÉÉ ºªÉ®ÉäMÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ ** 1117 ** 
                                         (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0 , +ÉÉäÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                      ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ nÉâócÉÊ®pÉ iÉÖ BÉE]ÚhÉ É µÉhÉàÉäcxÉÖiÉÂ * 
                      BÉEhbÚÉÊ´ÉºÉ{ÉÇi´ÉMnÉäÉ-ÉÊ´ÉÉBÉEhÉÉÇÉ ÊFÉnÉäÉcÉ ** 202 ** 
                                       (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, É Ê{É{{ÉãªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                      nÉ´ÉÉÔ ÉÊxÉ¶ÉÉMÉÖhÉÉ ÉÊBÉExiÉÖ xÉäj É BÉEhÉÉÇºªÉ®ÉäMÉxÉÖiÉÂ ** 202 ** 
                                      (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ 0, c®ÉÒiÉBÉDªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
 
vÉ´É ({ÉEãÉàÉÂ) 
 
àÉÖ−BÉEBÉE{ÉãÉÉ¶ÉvÉ´É........´ÉßFÉÉÉÊjÉ{ÉEãÉÉ SÉäÉÊiÉ ** 20 ** 
                      àÉÖ−BÉEBÉEÉÉÊnMÉÇhÉÉä cªÉä−É àÉänÉ äPxÉ& ¶ÉÖµÉEnÉä−É¿iÉÂ * 
àÉäcÉ¶ÉÇ& {ÉÉhbÖ®ÉäMÉÉ¶àÉ¶ÉBÉEÇ®ÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉ& {É®& ** 21 ** 
                                                        (ºÉÖ0 ºÉÚ0 38) 
 
                      vÉ´ÉºiÉÖ iÉÖ´É®& ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉä àÉvÉÖ®Éä àÉäc{ÉÉhbÖcÉ * 
 BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉc®Æ iÉºªÉ {ÉEãÉÆ º´ÉÉnÖ BÉE−ÉÉªÉBÉEàÉÂ ** 838 ** 
                      ÉÊcàÉÆ °ôFÉÆ MÉÖ°ô ºiÉà£ÉÉÒ ´ÉÉiÉãÉÆ BÉ E{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ *   
                                                                (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
                                                                                                                  
vÉ´É& ¶ÉÉÒiÉ|ÉàÉäcÉ ò{ÉÉhbÖÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{Éc& ** 41 ** 
                                                    (àÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
 
vÉ´É& BÉE−ÉÉªÉ& BÉE]ÖBÉE& BÉE{ÉEPxÉÉäÉÊxÉãÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉ& * 
ÉÊ{ÉkÉ|ÉBÉEÉä{ÉhÉÉä °ôSªÉÉä ÉÊ´ÉYÉäªÉÉä nÉÒ{ÉxÉ& {É®& ** 109 ** 
                                                                  (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, |É£ÉpÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
vÉ´É& ¶ÉÉÒiÉ& |ÉàÉäcÉ¶ÉÇ& {ÉÉhbÖÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{Éc& * 
àÉvÉÖ®ºiÉÖ´É®ºiÉºªÉ {ÉEãÉÆ SÉ àÉvÉÖ®Æ àÉxÉÉBÉEÂ ** 60 ** 
                                                               (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, ´É]ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
 
 
vÉ´É (¶ÉÉJÉÉ i´ÉBÉEÂ) 
 
 àÉÖ−BÉEBÉE{ÉãÉÉ¶É vÉ´É....................´ÉßFÉÉÉÊjÉ{É EãÉÉ SÉäÉÊiÉ ** 20 ** 
àÉÖ−BÉEBÉEÉÉÊnMÉÇhÉÉä cªÉä−É àÉänÉäPxÉ& ¶ÉÖµÉEnÉä−ÉciÉÂ *  CDXII  àÉäcÉ¶ÉÇ& {ÉÉhbÖ®ÉäMÉÉ¶àÉ¶ÉBÉEÇ®ÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉ& {É®& ** 21 ** 
                                                             (ºÉÖ0 ºÉÚ0 38) 
 
                      BÉÖE−~ä--- 
                      JÉÉÊn®Éä vÉ´É`SÉ ãÉä{É& ** 124 ** 
                                                              (SÉ0 ÉÊSÉ0 7) 
 
                      ÉÊ´ÉºÉ{Éæ-- 
  JÉÉÊn®Æ ºÉ{iÉ{ÉhÉÇ\SÉ àÉÖºiÉàÉÉ®M´ÉvÉÆ vÉ´ÉàÉÆ * 
......{ÉßlÉMÉÉãÉä{ÉxÉÆ BÉÖEªÉÉÇnÂ uxu¶É& ºÉ´ÉÇ¶ÉÉä%ÉÊ{É´ÉÉ ** 88-92 ** 
                                                               (SÉ0 ÉÊSÉ0 21)  
                      BÉEhÉÇ òk´Éä- 
                      ®ºÉàÉÉ©ÉBÉEÉÊ{ÉilÉÉxÉÉÆ àÉvÉÚBÉE vÉ ´É¶ÉÉãÉVÉàÉÂ * 
{ÉÚÚ®hÉÉlÉÈ |É¶ÉÆºÉÉÎxiÉ iÉèãÉÆ ´ÉÉ iÉèÉÌ´É{ÉÉÉÊSÉiÉàÉÂ ** 47 ** 
                                                         (+É0 U0 =0 39) 
 
                         vÉ´ÉºiÉÖ iÉÖ´É®& ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉä àÉvÉÖ ®Éä àÉäc{ÉÉhbÖcÉ * 
BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉc®Æ ............................. ** 838 ** 
                                                              (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
vÉ´É& BÉE−ÉÉªÉ& BÉE]ÖBÉE& BÉE{ÉEPxÉÉäÉÊxÉãÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉ& * 
ÉÊ{ÉkÉ|ÉBÉEÉä{ÉhÉÉä °ôSªÉÉä ÉÊ´ÉYÉäªÉÉä nÉÒ{ÉxÉ& {É®& ** 109 ** 
                                                             (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, |É£ÉpÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ) 
 
vÉ´É& ¶ÉÉÒiÉ& |ÉàÉäcÉ¶ÉÇ& {ÉÉhbÖÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{Éc& * 
àÉvÉÖ®ºiÉÖ´É®ºiÉ............................. ** 60 ** 
                                                               (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, ´É]ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
vÉ´É& ¶ÉÉÒiÉ|ÉàÉäcÉ ò{ÉÉhbÖÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{Éc& ** 41 ** 
                                                              (àÉ0 {ÉÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0 {Éß−~ µÉE0 115) 
AãÉ´ÉÉãÉÖBÉE (+ÉÉãÉÖ¤ÉÖJÉÉ®É) (àÉÚãÉàÉÂ) 
 
                     BÉÖE−~èãÉ´ÉÉãÉÖBÉE.............. ......´ÉºÉÖBÉEÉä¶ÉÉÒ®ÉhÉÉÒÉÊiÉ 
        n¶ÉäàÉÉÉÊxÉ ¶ÉÖµÉE¶ÉÉävÉxÉÉÉÊxÉ £É´ÉÉÎxiÉ ** 20 ** 
                                           (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0  4) 
 
                     AãÉÂ´ÉÉãÉÖ BÉE]ÖBÉEÆ {ÉÉBÉEä BÉE−ÉÉ ªÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ ** 1324 ** 
                     cÉÎxiÉ BÉEhbÚµÉhÉSUÉÌniÉß]ÂBÉEÉºÉÉâ óÉÊSÉØpÖVÉ& * 
                     ¤ÉãÉÉºÉÉÊ´É−ÉÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ»ÉBÉÖE−~àÉÚjÉÉÊ´ É−ÉBÉßEàÉÉÒxÉÂ ** 1325 ** 
                                           (BÉEè0 ÉÊx É0, +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     AãÉÉãÉÖ BÉE]ÖBÉEÆ {ÉÉBÉEä BÉE−ÉÉªÉ Æ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ * 
                     cÉÎxiÉBÉEhbÚµÉhÉSUÉÌniÉß]ÂBÉEÉºÉÉâó ÉÊSÉØpÖVÉ& ** 
                     ¤ÉãÉÉºÉÉÊ´É−ÉÉÊ{ÉkÉÉòBÉÖE−~àÉÚjÉMÉn ÉÊµÉEàÉÉÒxÉÂ ** 121 ** 
                                          (£ÉÉ0 |É0  ÉÊxÉ0, BÉE{ÉÇÚ®ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.)  CDXIII   
                         
                    AãÉ´ÉÉãÉÖBÉE (+ÉÉãÉÖ¤ÉÖJÉÉ®É) (BÉ EÉhb0 i´ÉBÉEÂ) 
 
                     BÉÖE−~èãÉ´ÉÉãÉÖBÉE.............. ......´ÉºÉÖBÉEÉä¶ÉÉÒ®ÉhÉÉÒÉÊiÉ 
         n¶ÉäàÉÉÉÊxÉ ¶ÉÖµÉE¶ÉÉävÉxÉÉÉÊxÉ £É´ÉÉÎxiÉ ** 20 **  
                                           (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0  4) 
 
                     AãÉÂ´ÉÉãÉÖ BÉE]ÖBÉEÆ {ÉÉBÉEä BÉE−ÉÉ ªÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ ** 1324 ** 
                     cÉÎxiÉ BÉEhbÚµÉhÉSUÉÌniÉß]ÂBÉEÉºÉÉâ óÉÊSÉØpÖVÉ& * 
                     ¤ÉãÉÉºÉÉÊ´É−ÉÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ»ÉBÉÖE−~àÉÚjÉÉÊ´ É−ÉBÉßEàÉÉÒxÉÂ ** 1325 ** 
                                           (BÉEè0 ÉÊx É0, +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     AãÉÉãÉÖ BÉE]ÖBÉEÆ {ÉÉBÉEä BÉE−ÉÉªÉ Æ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ * 
                     cÉÎxiÉBÉEhbÚµÉhÉSUÉÌniÉß]ÂBÉEÉºÉÉâó ÉÊSÉØpÖVÉ& ** 
                     ¤ÉãÉÉºÉÉÊ´É−ÉÉÊ{ÉkÉÉòBÉÖE−~àÉÚjÉMÉn ÉÊµÉEàÉÉÒxÉÂ ** 121 ** 
                                         (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, BÉE{ÉÇÚ®ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
  
                        A®hb BÉEBÉEÇ]ÉÒ ({ÉEãÉàÉÂ) 
 
                     {ÉEãÉÆ BÉÚE¶àÉÉhb´ÉiÉÂ ¿PÉÆ ¤ÉßÆchÉÆ B ÉßEÉÊàÉÉÊVÉi{É®àÉÂ * 
                     nÉÒ{ÉxÉÆ ¶´ÉÉºÉBÉEÉºÉvxÉÆ |ÉÉÒÉÊiÉnÆ ÉÊ{ÉkÉ´ÉrÇxÉàÉÂ ** º´É0 ** 
                                  (<Æ0 àÉä0 {ãÉì0, BÉE Éä]ÂÂ]ÉBÉDBÉEãÉ) 
 
                     A®hbBÉEBÉEÇ]ÉÒ ãÉP´ÉÉÒ iÉÉÒFhÉÉÆ BÉ E]ÂÂ´ÉÉÒ ºÉÉÊiÉBÉDiÉBÉEÉ * 
                     ´ÉÉÒªÉÉæ−hÉÉ {ÉÉSÉxÉÉÒ ¿PÉÉ OÉÉÉ ÊchÉÉÒ BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉxÉÖiÉÂ ** 
                     A®hbBÉEBÉEÇ]ÉÒ FÉÉÒ®Æ {ÉÉSÉxÉÆ {É® àÉÆ ºàÉßiÉàÉÂ * 
                     {ÉEãÉÆ ºÉÉÊiÉBÉDiÉàÉvÉÖ®Æ {ÉBÉD´ÉÆ iÉÖ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ãÉPÉÖ ** º´É0 ** 
                                (p0 MÉÖ0 ÉÊ´É0, |ÉÉä. É Ê|É. µÉ. ¶ÉàÉÉÇ) 
 
                               
A®hbBÉEBÉEÇ]ÉÒ (àÉÚãÉàÉÂ) 
 
               i´ÉbÂ.àÉÚãÉÉÉÊnBÉEàÉºªÉ iÉÖ  * 
               i´ÉMnÉä−É´ÉÉiÉ®BÉDiÉÉÉÊn®ÉäMÉä−´É{ªÉÖ{É ªÉÖVªÉiÉä ** º´É0 ** 
                                        (<Æ0 àÉä0 {ãÉ Ä BÉßEiÉ BÉEÉä^ÉBÉDBÉEãÉ,)  
 
                     {ÉÉ]ãÉÉ......MÉÉäFÉÖ®BÉEÉ <ÉÊiÉ n ¶ÉäàÉÉÉÊxÉ ¶´ÉªÉlÉÖc®ÉÉÊhÉ £É´ÉÉÎxiÉ ** 38 ** 
                                                         (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 4 * 38) 
 
                     MÉÉäFÉÖ®BÉEÉä àÉÚjÉBÉßESUÅÉÉÊxÉãÉc®ÉhÉ ÉÆ  
                                              (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 25 * 40) 
 
                     `´ÉnÆ−]ÅÉä ¤ÉßÆchÉÉä ´Éß−ªÉ fò nÉä−É¶ÉàÉxÉÉä%ÉÎMxÉBÉßEiÉÂ * 
                     ¶ÉÚãÉØpÉäMÉBÉßESUÅPxÉ& |ÉàÉäcÉÊ´ÉÉÊxÉ´ ÉiÉÇBÉE& ** 103 **  CDXIV                                                (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0 MÉÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     MÉÉäFÉÖ®Éä àÉvÉÖ®Éä ´Éß−ªÉÉä nÉÒ{ÉxÉ Éä ¤ÉãÉ{ÉÖÉÎ−]BÉßEiÉÂ ** 69 ** 
                     ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉä ´ÉÉÎºiÉ´ÉÉiÉPxÉÉä nÉä−É jÉªÉÉÊxÉ¤ÉcÇhÉ& * 
                     ØpÉäMÉàÉäcBÉßESUÅÉ¶àÉ ¶´ÉÉºÉBÉEÉºÉ âó VÉÉc®&  ** 70 ** 
                                              (BÉEè0  ÉÊxÉ0 +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                             
      ºªÉÉiÉÉàÉÖ£ÉÉè MÉÉèFÉÖ®BÉEÉè ºÉÖ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉè ¤ÉãÉ|ÉnÉè iÉ Éè àÉvÉÖ®Éè SÉ ¤ÉßÆchÉÉè * 
                       BÉßESUÅÉ¶àÉ®ÉÒàÉäcÉÊ´ÉnÉcxÉÉ¶ÉxÉÉè ® ºÉÉªÉxÉÉè iÉjÉ ¤Éßc™ÙhÉ& {É ** 43 ** 
                                           (®É0 ÉÊxÉ 0 MÉÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                       MÉÉäFÉÖ®& ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉ& º´ÉÉnÖ¤ÉÇãÉB ÉßEuÉÎºiÉ ¶ÉÉävÉxÉ&  ** 45 ** 
                       àÉvÉÖ®Éä nÉÒ{ÉxÉÉä ´Éß−ªÉ& {ÉÖÉÎ −]n¶SÉÉ¶àÉ®ÉÒc®& * 
                       |ÉàÉäc ¶´ÉÉºÉBÉEÉºÉ¶ÉÇ& BÉßESUÅØpÉ äMÉ ´ÉÉiÉxÉÖiÉÂ  ** 46 ** 
                                          (£ÉÉ0 |É0  ÉÊxÉ0 MÉÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
 
                                            cÉÎºiÉ¶ÉÖh bÉÒ (ºÉÆ0 ´É0) 
 
                      cÉÎºiÉ¶ÉÖhbÉÒ BÉE]Ú−hÉÉ ºªÉÉiÉÂÂ º ÉÉÉÎxxÉ{ÉÉiÉV´É®É{ÉcÉ ** 77 ** 
                                         (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0,  {É{ÉÇ]ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ) 
 
                      ´ÉÉkÉÉÊ{ÉkÉc®É ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ SÉFÉÖ−ªÉ É `´ÉÉºÉBÉEÉºÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ * 
                      +ÉbÂMÉàÉnÇc®É ´Éß−ªÉÉ MÉÖãàÉPxÉÉÒ S É ÉÊ´É−ÉÉÊhÉBÉEÉ ** 
                                         (àÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0)  
 
VÉãÉBÉÖEà£ÉÉÒ (ºÉÆ0´É0) 
 
        ´ÉÉÉÊ®{ÉhÉÉÔ ÉÊcàÉÉ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ ãÉP´ÉÉÒ º´ÉÉuÉÒ ºÉ® É BÉE]Ö& ** 1468 **  
        nÉä−ÉjÉªÉc®ÉÒ °ôFÉÉ ÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ»ÉV´É®¶ÉÉä−ÉØiÉÂ * 
                        (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
   
        VÉãÉBÉÖEà£ÉÉÒBÉEVÉÆ £ÉºàÉ {ÉBÉD´ÉÆ MÉÉäàÉÚjÉMÉÉÉÊãÉiÉàÉ Â * 
        ÉÊ{É¤ÉäiÉÂ BÉEÉäp´É iÉµÉEÉ¶ÉÉÒ MÉãÉMÉhbÉä{É¶ÉÉxiÉªÉ ä ** 
                         (ÉÊxÉ. +ÉÉ. ´É. ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
     
                                    
                               VÉÉÒ´ÉxiÉÉÒ (àÉÚãÉàÉÂ) 
 
                      VÉÉÒ´ÉxiÉÉÒ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉ º´ÉÉnÖ& ÉÎºx ÉMvÉÉ nÉä−ÉjÉªÉÉ{ÉcÉ * 
                      ®ºÉÉªÉxÉÉÒ ¤ÉãÉBÉE®ÉÒ SÉFÉÖ−ªÉÉ  OÉÉÉÊchÉÉÒ ãÉPÉÖ& ** 
                                   (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, MÉÖbÖSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                               CDXV  SÉFÉÖ−ªÉÉ ºÉ´ÉÇnÉä−ÉPxÉÉÒ VÉÉÒ´ÉxiÉÉÒ àÉvÉÖ®É ÉÊcàÉÉ * 
                      ¶ÉÉBÉEÉxÉÉÆ |É´É®ÉxªÉÚxÉÉ ÉÊuiÉÉÒª ÉÉ ÉÊBÉE\ÉÂÉÊSÉnä´É iÉÖ ** 37 **  
                                 (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, MÉÖbÖSªÉÉÉÊn  ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                      VÉÉÒ´ÉxiÉÉÒ àÉvÉÖ®É ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ ®BÉDiÉ ÉÊ{ÉkÉÉÉÊxÉãÉÉ{ÉcÉ * 
                      FÉªÉnÉcV´É®ÉxÉÂ cÉÎxiÉ BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉÒª ÉÇÉÊ´É´ÉvÉÇxÉÉÒ ** 39 **  
                                 (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, MÉÖbÖSªÉÉÉÊn  ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                      xÉäjÉ®ÉäMÉc®É ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ ÉÊ{ÉkÉÉºÉßB ÉDBÉE{ÉExÉÉ¶ÉxÉÉÒ * 
                      ®ºÉÉªÉxÉÉÒ VÉÉÒ´ÉxÉÉÒªÉÉ VÉÉÒ´Éxi ÉÉÒ àÉvÉÖ®É ®ºÉä **  
                                  (àÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
 
VÉÉÒ´ÉxiÉÉÒ `´ÉÉºÉBÉEÉºÉPxÉÉÒ º´ÉªÉÉÇ SÉ FÉªÉxÉÉÉÊ¶ÉxÉÉÒ *  
                                                                  (®É0 ´É0) 
 
 
                                                     BÉE®{ÉEÂºÉ (àÉÚãÉàÉÂ) 
 
         ÉÊ{É{{ÉãÉÉÒÉÊ{É{{ÉãÉÉÒàÉÚãÉ........àÉÉÊ®SÉÉVÉàÉÉän É....n¶ÉäàÉÉÉÊxÉ  
   ¶ÉÚãÉ|É¶ÉàÉxÉÉÉÊxÉ £É´ÉÉÎxiÉ ** 45 ** 
                (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 04) 
 
         ÉÊ{É{{ÉãÉÉÒÉÊ{É{{ÉãÉÉÒàÉÚãÉ......c®ähÉÖBÉEèãÉÉVÉàÉÉ änäxpªÉ´É....BÉE]Ö®ÉäÉÊchÉÉÒ SÉäÉÊiÉ ** 22 ** 
         ÉÊ{É{{ÉãªÉÉÉÊn& BÉE{ÉEc®& |ÉÉÊiÉ¶ªÉÉªÉÉÉÊxÉãÉÉâ óÉÊSÉ& * 
         ÉÊxÉcxªÉÉnÂnÉÒ{ÉxÉÉä MÉÖãàÉ¶ÉÚãÉPxÉ `SÉÉàÉ{ÉÉSÉxÉ&  ** 23 ** 
                (ºÉÖ0 ºÉÚ0 28) 
 
         +ÉVÉàÉÉänÉ iÉÖ ¶ÉÚãÉPxÉÉÒ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉä−hÉÉ BÉE{ÉE´É ÉiÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ * 
         ÉÊcBÉDBÉEÉvàÉÉxÉÉâóSÉÉÒcÇÉÎxiÉ BÉßEÉÊàÉÉÊVÉuÉÊ‡nÉÒ{ÉxÉ ÉÒ ** 96 ** 
                (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, ¶ÉiÉ{ÉÖ−{ÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
         +ÉVÉàÉÉänÉ BÉE]ÖºiÉÉÒFhÉÉ nÉÒ{ÉxÉÉÒ BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉxÉÖi É * 
         =−hÉÉ ÉÊ´ÉnÉÉÊcxÉÉÒ ØtÉÉ ´Éß−ªÉÉ ¤ÉãÉBÉE®ÉÒ ãÉP ÉÖ&  ** 
         xÉäjÉÉàÉªÉBÉE{ÉESUÉÌnÉÊcBÉDBÉEÉ¤ÉÉÎºiÉâóVÉÉä c®äiÉÂ ** 79 ** 
         (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, c®ÉÒiÉBÉDªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
 
BÉEä¶É®ÉVÉ (ºÉÆ0 ´É0) 
 
                      {ÉÉÒiÉ£Éßb .MÉÉä BÉE]ÖÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉºiÉÉÒFhÉÉä−hÉ¶SÉ BÉE−ÉÉªÉBÉE& * 
                      àÉÚjÉãÉÉä º´ÉänVÉxÉxÉÉÒ ¿tÉÉä ´Éß−ª É& ÉÊ¶É®ÉäÉÌkÉxÉÖiÉÂ ** 
                      BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉV´É®{ãÉÉÒc´ÉßÉÊr¶ãÉÉÒ{Én xÉÉ¶ÉxÉ& * 
                      xÉBÉDiÉÉxvªÉoÉÎ−] nÉè¤ÉÇãªÉBÉßESU Å{ÉÉhbÖµÉhÉÉ{Éc& ** 
                      BÉEhÉÉÇàÉªÉ{Éä`´ÉÉºÉBÉEÉºÉØpÉäMÉ BÉß EÉÊàÉ¶ÉÚãÉxÉÖiÉÂ * 
                      ´ÉãÉÉÒ{ÉÉÊãÉiÉ¿iÉÂ BÉEä¶ªÉÉä ÉÊ´É¶É ä−ÉÉiÉÂ BÉEÉÉÊàÉãÉÉ{Éc& ** º´É0 **  CDXVI                                   (<Æ0 àÉä0 {ãÉì0   BÉßEiÉ BÉEÉä^ÉBÉDBÉEãÉ ) 
 
                      BÉE]Ö{ÉÉBÉE®ºÉÆ ªÉÖMàÉÆ iÉnÂ£ÉºàÉ µÉh É¶ÉÉiÉÉÊ£ÉiÉÂ * 
                       (ºÉÉä0 ÉÊxÉ0 II- 585) 
 
                                      
BÉEäiÉBÉEÉÒ (àÉÚãÉàÉÂ) 
 
                     iÉºªÉÉ& ºiÉxÉÉä%ÉÊiÉÉÊ¶ÉÉÊ¶É®& BÉE] Ö& ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{Éc& * 
                     ®ºÉÉªÉxÉBÉE®Éä ¤ÉãªÉÉä näcnÉfªÉÇB ÉE®& {É®&  ** 71 **   
                                    (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, BÉE® ´ÉÉÒ®ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                                               
 
BÉEÉÒ]àÉÉ®ÉÒ ({ÉjÉàÉÂ) 
 
                     ´ÉÉiÉ¶ãÉä−àÉV´É®c®É ºÉÆvªÉºlÉÉÒÉÊx É |ÉºÉÉÉÊ®hÉÉÒ  ** 
                                          (¶ÉÉäfãÉ É ÊxÉ0) 
 
                     ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ BÉßEÉÊàÉPxÉÉÒ ¶ÉÉä{ÉEPxÉÉÒ c ÂªÉÖ−hÉÉ âóSªÉÉ SÉ nÉÒ{ÉxÉÉÒ * 
                     BÉEÉºÉPxÉÉÒ .................... ..................... 
                  (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
 
                                        
BÉÖEºÉÖà£É ({ÉEãÉàÉÂ)     
 
                     BÉÖEºÉÖà£ÉiÉèãÉàÉÖ−hÉÆ SÉ ÉÊ´É{ÉÉBÉEä BÉE]ÖBÉEÆ MÉÖâó  * 
                     ÉÊ´ÉnÉÉÊc SÉ ÉÊ´É¶Éä−ÉähÉ ºÉ´ÉÇnÉä −É|ÉBÉEÉä{ÉhÉàÉÂ  ** 293 ** 
                                          (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 27) 
 
                     ÉÊxÉà¤ÉÉiÉºÉÉÒBÉÖEºÉÖà£ÉàÉÚãÉBÉE...... ...VªÉÉäÉÊiÉ−àÉiÉÉÒ 
                     {ÉEãÉiÉèãÉÉÉÊxÉ iÉÉÒFhÉÉÉÊxÉ ãÉPÉÚxª ÉÖ−hÉ´ÉÉÒªÉÉÇÉÊhÉ BÉE]ÚÉÊxÉ 
                     BÉE]ÖÉÊ´É{ÉÉBÉEÉÉÊxÉ ºÉ®ÉhªÉÉÊxÉãÉBÉ E{ÉEBÉßEÉÊàÉBÉÖE−~|ÉàÉäcÉÊ¶É®Éä®ÉäMÉÉ 
                     {Éc®ÉÉÊhÉ SÉäÉÊiÉ ** 115 ** 
                                         (ºÉÖ0 ºÉÚ0 4 5) 
 
                     ÉÎºxÉMPÉÉäàÉÉ º´ÉÉnÖÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉä−hÉÉ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE®ÉÒ MÉÖâó& ** 22 ** 
                     oBÉEÂ ¶ÉÖµÉEØiBÉE]Ö& {ÉÉBÉEä iÉu¤nÉÒVÉ Æ BÉÖEºÉÖà£ÉVÉàÉÂ  * 
                                         (+É0 ¿0 ºÉ Ú0 6) 
 
                     iÉuiBÉÖEºÉÖà£É& BÉE]ÖBÉEÉä ÉÊ´ÉnÉcÉÒ B ÉE{ÉExÉÉ¶ÉxÉ& ** 87 ** 
                                         (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0 , vÉÉxªÉ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                     BÉÖEºÉÖà£É¤ÉÉÒVÉÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ÉÎºxÉMvÉÆ ¶ÉÉ ÒiÉÆ BÉE−ÉÉªÉBÉEàÉÂ  * 
                     +É´Éß−ªÉÆ MÉÖâó SÉ |ÉÉäBÉDiÉÆ BÉE{É E´ÉÉiÉÉ òÉÊ{ÉkÉxÉÖiÉÂ **  CDXVII                                           (ÉÊxÉ0 ®0) 
 
                     BÉÖEºÉÖà£ÉÆ ´ÉÉiÉãÉÆ BÉßESUÅ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{É kÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcàÉÂ ** 192 ** 
                                 (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, c®É ÒiÉBÉDªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
 
BÉÖEºÉÖà£É ({ÉjÉàÉÂ) 
 
                     BÉEÉèºÉà£ÉÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ °ôFÉàÉÖ−àÉÆ ¶ãÉä−àÉc® Æ ãÉPÉÖ ** 272 ** 
                                         (ºÉÖ0 ºÉÚ0 4 6) 
 
                     °ôFÉÉähÉàãÉÆ BÉEÉèºÉÖà£ÉÆ MÉÖâó ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE ®Æ ºÉ®àÉÂ ** 101 ** 
                                         (+É0 U0 ºÉ Ú0 6) 
 
                     BÉÖEºÉÖà£ÉÆ ´ÉÉiÉãÉÆ °ôFÉÆ ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉ BÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcàÉÂ ** 105 ** 
                                         (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, º ÉÖ´ÉhÉÉÇÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ,) 
                    BÉEÉèºÉÖà£ÉÆ ÉÊ{ÉkÉãÉÆ º´ÉÉnÖ °ôFÉÉä−hÉÆ ¶ãÉä−àÉØããÉPÉÖ ** 639 ** 
                                        (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0,  +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                      BÉEÉèºÉà£É¶ÉÉBÉEÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ BÉE]Ú−hÉÆ É Ê´ÉhàÉÚjÉnÉä−ÉÉ{Éc®Æ àÉnPxÉàÉÂ * 
                      oÉÎ−]|ÉºÉÉnÆ BÉE°ôiÉä ÉÊ´É¶Éä−ÉÉpÉ ÊSÉ|ÉnÆ nÉÒÉÎ{iÉBÉE®Æ SÉ ´ÉÿxÉ& ** 143 ** 
                                 (®É0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, c®É ÒiÉBÉDªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                      BÉÖEºÉÖà£ÉÆ ´ÉÉiÉãÉÆ BÉßESUÅÉ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcàÉÂ ** 192 ** 
                                 (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, c® ÉÒiÉBÉDªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                      ¶ÉÉBÉEÆ MÉÖâó SÉ °ôFÉÆ SÉ |ÉÉªÉÉä ÉÊ´É−]£ªÉ VÉÉÒªÉÇÉÊiÉ * 
                       àÉvÉÖ®Æ ¶ÉÉÒiÉ´ÉÉÒªÉÇ SÉ {ÉÖ®ÉÒ−É ºªÉ SÉ £ÉänxÉàÉÂ ** 
                                  (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 27) 
 
                                    
                           àÉÉvÉ´ÉÉÒ ({ÉÖ−{ÉàÉÂ) 
 
              +ÉÉÊiÉàÉÖBÉDiÉÆ ºÉÖMÉÉÎxvÉ ºªÉÉnÂ ØnªÉàÉÖBÉDiÉ  ºÉÖàÉhbxÉàÉÂ ** 141 ** 
                                        (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉ©ÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
              +ÉÉÊiÉàÉÖBÉDiÉÉä ãÉPÉÖ& ¶ÉÉÒiÉ& nÉä−ÉjÉªÉÉÊx É¤ÉcÇhÉ& ** 1487 ** 
                                        (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0,  +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
              àÉÉvÉ´ÉÉÒ BÉE]ÖBÉEÉ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ BÉE−ÉÉªÉÉ àÉn MÉÉÎxvÉBÉEÉ * 
              ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉEÉºÉµÉhÉÉxÉÂ cÉÎxiÉ nÉc¶ÉÉä−É ÉÊ´É xÉÉÉÊ¶ÉxÉÉÒ ** 108 ** 
                                     (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, BÉE ®´ÉÉÒ®ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
              àÉÉvÉ´ÉÉÒ àÉvÉÖ®É ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ ãÉPÉÖnÉæ−ÉjÉªÉÉ {ÉcÉ **  
                                      (àÉ0 {ÉÉ0 ÉÊxÉ 0)  CDXVIII   
              àÉÉvÉ´ÉÉÒ àÉvÉÖ®É ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ ãÉP´ÉÉÒ nÉä−ÉjÉª ÉÉ{ÉcÉ ** 41 ** 
                                      (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ 0, {ÉÖ−{É´ÉMÉÇ,) 
                                
                                àÉiºªÉ{ÉÉÊjÉBÉEÉ (ºÉ Æ0 ´É0) 
 
                      |ÉºÉÉ®hÉÉÒ MÉÖ°ôÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉÉ ºÉ®É º ÉxvÉÉxÉBÉßExàÉiÉÉ * 
                      ÉÊjÉnÉä−É¶ÉàÉxÉÉÒ ´Éß−ªÉÉ iÉäVÉ&B ÉEÉÉÎxiÉ¤ÉãÉ|ÉnÉ  ** 278 **     
                                   (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0,MÉÖbÚSªÉÉ ÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      |ÉºÉÉ®hÉÉÒ ºÉ®É ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ ´ÉÉÒªÉ Éæ−hÉÉ ¶ÉÖBÉDãÉãÉÉ MÉÖ°ô& ** 106 ** 
                      µÉhÉºÉxvÉÉxÉ¤ÉãÉBÉßEiÉÂ ´ÉÉiÉ®B ÉDiÉÉÊjÉnÉä−ÉcÉ  **   
                                   (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0 +ÉÉè−É ÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      |ÉºÉÉ®hÉÉÒ MÉÖ°ô−hÉÉ SÉ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉ É ´ÉÉiÉÉÊ´ÉxÉÉÉÊ¶ÉxÉÉÒ * 
                      +É¶ÉÇ&`´ÉªÉlÉÖcxjÉÉÒ SÉ àÉãÉÉÊ´É−]à£ ÉcÉÉÊ®hÉÉÒ  ** 38 **   
                                   (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0,{É{ÉÇªÉ ÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
                     ´ÉÉiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉc®É ºÉÉä−hÉÉ ¤ÉãªÉÉ ´Éß−ªÉÉ |ÉºÉÉ®hÉÉÒ  *  
                                   (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
 
                      |ÉºÉÉ®hÉÉÒ MÉÖ°ô´ÉÇß−ªÉÉ ºÉxvÉÉx É¤ÉãÉBÉßEiºÉ®É * 
                      ´ÉÉÒªÉÉæ−hÉÉ ´ÉÉiÉxÉÖÉÊkÉBÉDiÉÉ ´ ÉÉiÉ®BÉDiÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcÉ  **    
                                   (àÉ0 {ÉÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
                             
ºÉÉ®hÉÉÒ ´ÉÉiÉ®BÉDiÉPxÉÉÒ ºÉÉä−hÉÉ ´Éß−ªÉÉ ¤ÉãÉ|ÉnÉ * 
                      BÉE]Â´ÉÉÒ SÉ ãÉPÉÖ SÉFÉÖ−ªÉÉ º´Éª ÉÉÇ V´É®ÉÊxÉ¶ÉÉxvªÉÉÊVÉiÉÂÂ  ** 
                                    (ºÉÉä0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
 
                      |ÉºÉÉ®hÉÉÒ MÉÖ°ô¶SÉÉä−hÉÉ ÉÊiÉBÉDi ÉÉ ¤ÉãªÉÉ ºÉ®É àÉiÉÉ * 
                      £ÉMxÉÉÉÎºlÉºÉxvÉÉxÉBÉE®ÉÒ BÉEÉÉÎx iÉBÉßErÉiÉÖ´ÉrÇBÉEÉ ** 
                      ´ÉÉiÉÉ¶ÉÇ& ¶ÉÉä{ÉEBÉE{ÉEcÉ àÉãÉºiÉ à£ÉBÉE®ÉÒ àÉiÉÉ * 
                      ´ÉÉiÉ®BÉDiÉÆ ÉÊjÉnÉä−ÉÆ SÉ xÉÉ¶Éª ÉäÉÊnÉÊiÉ BÉEÉÒÉÌkÉiÉÉ  **    
                                     (ÉÊxÉ0 ®0)   
                      |ÉºÉÉÉÊ®hÉÉÒ MÉÖ°ô´ÉÇß−ªÉÉ ¤ÉãÉº ÉxvÉÉxÉBÉßEiºÉ®É * 
                      ´ÉÉÒªÉÉæ−hÉÉ ´ÉÉiÉØiÉÂ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ  ´ÉÉiÉ®BÉDiÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcÉ  ** 235 **    
                                    (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, MÉÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                                     àÉänÉ (|ÉBÉExn)  
 
                     àÉänÉ º´ÉÉnÖ®ºÉÉ ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ FÉªÉnÉc V´É®É{ÉcÉ * 
                     ºÉÉ ÉÊ{ÉkÉÆ iÉÖ VÉªÉäSUÖµÉEÆ ºÉBÉE{ÉE Æ SÉ ÉÊ´É´ÉvÉÇªÉäiÉÂ ** 124 ** 
                                      (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, MÉÖb ÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
                                   
  CDXIX                                      xÉÉbÉÒÉËcMÉÖ (ÉÊxÉªÉÉ ÇºÉ) 
 
                     xÉÉÉÊbÉËcMÉºiÉÖ BÉE]ÖBÉEºiÉÉÒFhÉÉä− hÉ¶SÉÉÉÊ{É nÉÒ{ÉBÉE& 
                     BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉàÉãÉºiÉ££ÉàÉxÉÉäàÉÉäcÉàÉxÉÉ ¶ÉxÉ& ** 
                                      (ÉÊxÉ0 ®0 717)  
 
                     xÉÉbÉÒÉÊc‹Ù   BÉE]Ú−hÉÆ SÉ BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉÉÌiÉ¶ÉÉÉÎxiÉBÉßEiÉÂ * 
                     ÉÊ´É−]à£ÉxÉÉÊ´É¤ÉxvÉÉàÉnÉä−ÉPxÉÆ nÉ Ò{ÉxÉÆ {É®àÉÂ ** 41 ** 
                                      (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, ¶É iÉ{ÉÖ−{ÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     xÉÉbÉÒÒÉÊc‹Ù   BÉE]Ú−hÉÆ SÉ BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉÉÉÌkÉ¶ÉÉÉÎxiÉBÉßEiÉ * 
                     ÉÊ´É−~ÉÉÊ´É¤ÉxvÉÆnÉä−ÉPxÉàÉÉxÉÉcÉàÉ ªÉcÉÉÊ® SÉÆ ** 76 ** 
                                      (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, ÉÊ{ É{{ÉãªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
                                      (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ 0, c®ÉÒiÉBÉDªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ) 
                                      
xÉÉcÉÒ (ºÉÆ0 ´É0) 
 
                      xÉÉcÉÒ iÉÖ BÉEÉÊlÉiÉÉ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ ãÉ P´ÉÉÒ ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcÉ * 
                      àÉvÉÖàÉäcä iÉlÉÉ BÉÖE−~ä ¶ÉºªÉiÉä ÉÊ´ É−ÉàÉV´É®ä  ** º´É0 ** 
                                  (p0 MÉÖ0 ÉÊ´É0, ÉÊ|É0  ´ÉiÉÂ0 ¶ÉàÉÉÇ,) 
 
                      xÉÉMÉVÉÉÒcÂ´ÉÉ ºÉ®É ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ °ôF ÉÉä−hÉÉ BÉßEÉÊàÉ¶ÉÉä{ÉE¿iÉÂ * 
                      nÉÒ{ÉxÉÉÒ {ÉÉSÉxÉÉÒ ¤ÉãªÉÉ BÉEhbÚ i´ÉMnÉä−ÉxÉÉÉÊ¶ÉxÉÉÒ ** 
                      àÉvÉÖàÉäcÆ ªÉBÉßEnÂ¶ÉÉä{ÉEÆ ÉÊ´É¤ÉxvÉÆ ÉÊ´É−ÉàÉV´É®àÉÂ * 
                      +ÉÉÎMxÉàÉÉxtÉÆ SÉ ¶ÉàÉªÉäiÉÂ {É® ®BÉ DiÉ|ÉºÉÉnxÉÆ ** º´É& ** 
                     (<0 àÉä0 {ãÉì0 BÉßEiÉ BÉEÉä^ÉBÉDB ÉEãÉ, {Éß0 µÉE0 376) 
                       
                     BÉßEÉÊàÉ¿iÉÂ FÉÉ®BÉEàÉÉÇ SÉ iÉlÉÉ àÉÉàÉ VVÉBÉE& ºàÉßiÉ& ** 
                                   (ºÉÉä0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
 
                     BÉßEÉÊàÉ¿iÉÂ FÉÉ®BÉEàÉÉÇ SÉ iÉlÉÉ àÉÉÉ Ê£ÉVÉBÉE& ºàÉßiÉ& ** 
                                   (¶ÉÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
 
                                  ÉÊxÉBÉEÉäSÉBÉE (¤ÉÉ ÒVÉ i´ÉBÉEÂ) 
 
                     ÉÊxÉBÉEÉäSÉBÉEÆ MÉÖâó ÉÎºxÉMvÉÆ ´Éß−ª ÉÉä−hÉÆ º´ÉÉnÖ ¤ÉßÆchÉàÉÂ * 
                     ®BÉDiÉ|ÉºÉÉnxÉÆ ¤ÉãªÉÆ ´ÉÉiÉPxÉÆ B ÉE{ÉE ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉßEiÉÂ  ** 11 ** 
                                           (àÉ0 ÉÊxÉ 0) 
                     ´ÉÉiÉÉàÉÉÉÊ£É−ÉÖBÉEÉFÉÉä]àÉÖBÉÚEãÉBÉ EÉÊxÉBÉEÉäSÉBÉEÉ&  * 
                     MÉÖ°ô−hÉÉÎºxÉMvÉÆàÉvÉÖ®É& ºÉÉäâóàÉÉh ÉÉ ¤ÉãÉ|ÉnÉ& ** 
                      ´ÉÉiÉxPÉÉ ¤ÉßÆchÉÉ ´Éß−ªÉÉ& BÉ E{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉÉÉÊ£É´ÉvÉÇxÉÉ&  
                                        (SÉ0ºÉÚ0 27/ 157-158) 
 
                      ÉÊxÉBÉEÉäSÉBÉEÆ MÉÖ âó ÉÎºxÉMvÉÆ ´Éß−ªÉÉä−hÉ vÉÉiÉÖ´ÉvÉÇxÉàÉÂ *  CDXX                       ®BÉDiÉ|ÉºÉÉnxÉÆ º´ É É nÖ  ¤ÉãªÉÆ ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE®Æ àÉiÉàÉÂ ** 
                                                               (ÉÊxÉ0 ®0) 
                                                     
                                   {É xÉ º É  (àÉ ÚãÉ  i´ É BÉ EÂ)   
                      
                             iÉ nä´É  {É BÉ D´É Æ àÉ vÉ Ö®Æ ´É É iÉ É Ê{É kÉ É ÊxÉ ¤É cÇhÉ àÉ Â **  171 ** 
                     É Ê´É {É É BÉ Eä àÉ vÉ Ö®Æ ¶É É ÒiÉ Æ ®B É DiÉ É Ê{É kÉ |É º É É nxÉ àÉ Â **  
                                                                (º É Ö0 º É Ú0 46) 
 
 
                                  àÉÉäSÉJÉVÉÇÚ®{ÉxÉºÉxÉÉÉÊ®BÉEäãÉ{Éâó−ÉBÉEàÉÂ  
                      +ÉÉ©ÉÉiÉiÉÉãÉBÉEÉ¶àÉªÉÇ®ÉVÉÉnxÉ àÉvÉÚBÉEVÉàÉÂ ** 119 ** 
                      ºÉÉè´ÉÉÒ®¤Én®É‰ÉäããÉ{ÉEãMÉÖ¶ãÉä−àÉ ÉiÉBÉEÉänÂ£É´ÉàÉÂ * 
                      ´ÉÉiÉÉàÉÉÉÊ£É−ÉÖBÉEÉFÉÉäbàÉÖBÉÚEãÉ BÉEÉÊxÉBÉEÉäSÉBÉEàÉÂ ** 120 ** 
                      =âóàÉÉhÉÆ ÉÊ|ÉªÉÉãÉÆ SÉ ¤ÉßÆchÉÆ MÉ Ö°ô ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉàÉÂ * 
                      nÉcFÉiÉFÉªÉc®Æ ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉ|ÉºÉÉ nxÉàÉÂ ** 121 ** 
                      º´ÉÉnÖ{ÉÉBÉE®ºÉÆ ÉÎºxÉMvÉ ÉÊ´É−]É Îà£É BÉE{ÉE¶ÉÖµÉEBÉßEiÉÂ **  
                                                                (+É0 Ø0 ºÉÚ0 6) 
 
                      {ÉxÉºÉÆ iÉÖ´É®Æ º´ÉÉnÖ MÉÖ°ô ÉÊ´É−]É Îà£É ´ÉÉiÉãÉàÉÂ * 
                       ............................ .............** 463 ** 
                                                                (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0 +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      {ÉxÉºÉÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ºÉÖÉÊ{ÉÉÎSUãÉÆ MÉÖ°ô Ø tÉ ¤ÉãÉ´ÉÉÒªÉÇ´ÉßÉÊrnàÉÂ  
                      gÉàÉnÉcÉÊ´É¶ÉÉä−ÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉÆ âóÉÊSÉBÉ ßEnÂOÉÉÉÊc SÉ nÖVÉÇ®Æ  {É®àÉÂ ** 33 ** 
                                                                (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉ©ÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     {ÉxÉºÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ {ÉBÉD´ÉÆ ÉÎºxÉMvÉÆ ÉÊ{ÉkÉÉÉÊxÉãÉÉ{ÉcàÉÂ ** 25 ** 
                     iÉ{ÉÇhÉÆ ¤ÉßchÉÆ º´ÉÉnÖ àÉÉÆºÉãÉÆ ¶ãÉä −àÉãÉÆ£Éß¶ÉàÉÂ * 
                     ¤ÉãªÉÆ ¶ÉÖµÉE|ÉnÆ cÉÎxiÉ ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉ FÉiÉµÉhÉÉxÉÂ ** 26 ** 
                     +ÉÉàÉÆ iÉnä´É ÉÊ´É−]ÉÎà£É ´ÉÉiÉãÉÆ iÉ Ö´É®Æ MÉÖ°ô * 
                     nÉcBÉßExàÉvÉÖ®Æ ¤ÉãªÉÆ BÉE{ÉEàÉänÉä ÉÊ´ É´ÉrÇxÉàÉÂ ** 27 ** 
                                                              (£ÉÉ0 |É0, +ÉÉ©ÉÉÉÊn{ÉEãÉ  ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
                               
                                      {ÉhÉÇªÉ´ÉÉxÉÉÒ ({ÉjÉàÉÂ) 
 
                     iÉÉÒFhÉÉ {ÉhÉÇªÉ´ÉÉxªÉÖ−hÉÉ BÉE]ÖÉ ÎºiÉBÉDiÉÉ ®ºÉä ãÉPÉÖ& 
                     nÉÒ{ÉxÉÉÒ {ÉÉSÉxÉÉÒ âóSªÉÉ àÉãÉºÉÆO ÉÉÉÊchÉÉÒ {É®àÉÂ  ** 
                     +ÉÉÎMxÉàÉÉxtÉä ªÉBÉßEpÉäMÉä OÉchªÉÉàÉÖ n®ÉÊµÉEàÉÉè * 
                     ÉÊ´É−ÉÚÉÊSÉBÉEÉªÉÉàÉ¶àÉªÉÉÇ àÉÚjÉBÉßESUÅ ä SÉ ¶ÉºªÉiÉä  ** 
                              (p0 MÉÖ0 ÉÊ´É0  II BÉßEiÉ |ÉÉä0 ÉÊ|É0 µÉiÉ ¶ÉàÉÉÇ.)  
 
 
 
{ÉjÉºxÉÖcÉÒ (FÉÉÒ®àÉÂ) 
  CDXXI                       {ÉjÉºxÉÖcÉÒ SÉ ºÉäcÖhbÉä ´ÉXÉÉÒ FÉÉÒ ®ªÉÖiÉÉ%ÉÊ{É SÉ * 
                     iÉiFÉÉÒ®Æ ãÉPÉÖ°ôFÉÉä−hÉÆ iÉÉÒFhÉÆ i ÉnÂ nÉä−É£ÉänxÉàÉÂ * 
                     +É¶ÉÉæ£ÉMÉxn®ÉnÉÒxÉÉÆ BÉÖE−~ÉxÉÉÆ x ÉÉ¶ÉBÉEÆ £É´ÉäiÉÂ ** º´É0 ** 
                                       (bÉ0 AºÉ0 bÉ Ò0 BÉEÉàÉlÉ) 
 
 
 
 
®BÉDiÉ ÉÊSÉjÉBÉE (àÉÚãÉ) 
 
                     ÉÊSÉjÉBÉEàÉÚãÉÆ nÉÒ{ÉxÉÉÒªÉ{ÉÉSÉxÉÉÒªÉ MÉÖn¶ÉÉälÉÉ¶ÉÇ&¶ÉÚãÉc®ÉhÉÉàÉÂ * 
                                          (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 25) 
 
                     UÉªÉÉ¶ÉÖ−BÉEÆ iÉiÉÉä àÉÚãÉÆ àÉÉºÉÆ SÉ ÚhÉÉÔBÉßEiÉÆ ÉÊãÉcxÉÂ * 
                     ºÉÉÌ{É−ÉÉ àÉvÉÖºÉÉÌ{É£ªÉÉÆ ÉÊ{É¤ÉxÉÂ ´ÉÉ {ÉªÉºÉÉ ªÉÉÊiÉ& ** 63 ** 
                     +Éà£ÉºÉÉ ´ÉÉ ÉÊciÉÉxxÉÉ¶ÉÉÒ ¶ÉiÉÆ VÉÉÒ´ÉÉÊiÉ xÉÉÒâóVÉ& * 
                     àÉävÉÉ´ÉÉÒ ¤ÉãÉ´ÉÉxÉ BÉEÉxiÉÉä ´É{É Ö−àÉÉxÉ nÉÒ{iÉ{ÉÉ´ÉBÉE& ** 64 ** 
                                           (+É0 ¿0 =0 39) 
 
                     BÉEÉãÉÉä BªÉÉãÉ& BÉEÉãÉàÉÚãÉÉä%ÉÊiÉnÉ Ò{ªÉÉä 
                     àÉÉVÉÉÇ®Éä%ÉÎMxÉnÉÇcBÉE& {ÉÉ´ÉBÉE¶SÉ  * 
                     ÉÊSÉjÉÉbÂ.MÉÉä%ªÉÆ ®BÉDiÉÉÊSÉjÉÉä àÉcÉbÂ.MÉ& 
                     ºªÉÉpÖpÉ†ÉÎ`SÉjÉBÉEÉä%xªÉÉä MÉÖhÉÉfªÉ & ** 49 **  
 
                     ºlÉÚãÉBÉEÉªÉBÉE®Éä âóSªÉ& BÉÖE−~Px ÉÉä ®BÉDiÉÉÊSÉjÉBÉE& * 
                     ®ºÉä ÉÊxÉªÉÉàÉBÉEÉä ãÉÉäcä ´ÉävÉBÉE¶SÉ ®ºÉÉªÉxÉ& ** 47 ** 
                                  (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0 ÉÊ{É{{Éã ªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                      ÉÊSÉjÉBÉE& BÉE]ÖBÉE& {ÉÉBÉEä ´ÉcÂÉÊx ÉBÉßEi{ÉÉSÉxÉÉä ãÉPÉÖ& ** 70 ** 
                      °ôFÉÉä−hÉÉä OÉchÉÉÒBÉÖE−~¶ÉÉä{ÉEÉ¶ ÉÇ&BÉßEÉÊàÉBÉEÉºÉxÉÖiÉÂ * 
                     ´ÉÉiÉ¶ãÉä−àÉc®Éä OÉÉcÉÒ ´ÉÉiÉPxÉ&  ¶ãÉä−àÉÉÊ{ÉkÉØiÉÂ  ** ”   
                                 (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, c®É ÒiÉBÉDªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,)  
 
 
®ÉäÉÊciÉBÉE (¶ÉÉJÉÉ i´ÉBÉEÂ) 
 
                     ®ÉäcÉÒiÉBÉEãÉÉiÉÉxÉÉÆ iÉÖ BÉEÉhbBÉEÉx É£ÉªÉÉVÉãÉä ** 81 ** 
                     àÉÚjÉä ´ÉÉ ºÉÖxÉÖªÉÉkÉSSÉ ºÉ{iÉ®ÉjÉ ÉÎºlÉiÉÆ ÉÊ{É¤ÉäiÉÂ * 
                     BÉEÉàÉãÉÉMÉÖãàÉàÉäcÉ¶ÉÇ& {ãÉÉÒcºÉ´ÉÉæn ®ÉÊµÉEàÉÉÒxÉÂ ** 82 ** 
                     ºÉ cxªÉÉVVÉÉä‹ãÉ®ºÉèVÉÉÔhÉå ºªÉÉSSÉ ÉjÉ £ÉÉäVÉxÉàÉÂ * 
                                            (SÉ0 ÉÊS É0 13) 
 
                     ®ÉäcÉÒiÉBÉE& {ãÉÉÒcPÉÉiÉÉÒ °ôSªÉÉä ®B ÉDiÉ|ÉºÉÉnxÉ& ** 35 ** 
                                     (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0 , ´É]ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
                      CDXXII   ®ÉäcÉÒiÉBÉEÉä ªÉBÉßEiÉÂ {ãÉÉÒc MÉÖãàÉÉän®c®& ºÉ®& ** 120 ** 
                                       (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, + ÉÉ©ÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                       ®ÉäcÉÒiÉBÉE& BÉE]ÖÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉ& ºÉ®Éä −hÉ& BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉxÉÖiÉÂ ** 915 ** 
                       {ãÉÉÒcÉän®ªÉBÉßEnÂMÉÖãàÉàÉÉÆºÉàÉänÉ äÉÊ´É−ÉÉ{Éc& * 
                       £ÉÚiÉÉxÉÉcÉÊ´É¤ÉvÉÉ òBÉE{ÉE¶ÉÚãÉ°ôVÉÉ{Éc& ** 
                                        (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0,  +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
                               
®ÉäcÉÒiÉBÉEuªÉÆ ÉÎºxÉMvÉÆ iÉÖ´É®Æ BÉE]ÖBÉEÆ àÉiÉàÉÂ * 
                      ®BÉDiÉ|ÉºÉÉnxÉÆ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉ Æ SÉ ºÉ®Æ àÉiÉàÉÂ ** 
                      BÉßEÉÊàÉ{ãÉÉÒc®BÉDiÉnÉä−ÉµÉhÉBÉEhÉÇ° ôVÉÉ{ÉcàÉÂ * 
                      ÉÊ´É−ÉÆ xÉäjÉ°ôVÉÆ MÉÖãàÉªÉBÉßEiBÉE{ÉEÉ Ê´ÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉàÉÂ ** 
                      ´ÉÉiÉÆ ÉÊ´É¤ÉÆxvÉÆ àÉÉÆºÉÆ SÉ àÉänÆ ¶É ÚãÉÆ SÉ xÉÉ¶ÉªÉäiÉÂ * 
                      +ÉÉxÉÉcÆ £ÉÚiÉ¤ÉÉvÉÉ SÉ xÉÉ¶ÉªÉ äÉÊnÉÊiÉ BÉEÉÒÉÌkÉiÉàÉÂ ** 
                                          (ÉÊxÉ0 ®0)  
 
                      ®ÉäcÉÒiÉBÉEÉè BÉE]ÖÉÎºxÉMvÉÉè BÉE−ÉÉª ÉÉè SÉ ºÉÖ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉè * 
                      BÉßEÉÊàÉnÉä−É µÉhÉ {ãÉÉÒc®BÉDiÉxÉäj ÉÉàÉªÉÉ{ÉcÉè ** 16 ** 
                                     (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, ¶ÉÉ ãàÉãªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                       ®ÉäcÉÒiÉBÉE& ºÉ®Éä MÉÖãàÉªÉBÉßEiÉÂ { ãÉÉÒcÉän®É{Éc& ** 
                                          (àÉ0 ÉÊ´É0 ) 
 
                     ®ÉäcÉÒiÉBÉEÉä ªÉBÉßEiÉÂ {ãÉÉÒc MÉÖãàÉÉä n®c®& {É®àÉÂ ** 
                                          (ºÉÉä0 ÉÊxÉ 0) 
 
¶ÉÉãÉ& (BÉEÉ0 àÉVVÉÉ.) 
 
                     ¶ÉÉãÉBÉE]Â{ÉEãÉ.................. ...<ÉÊiÉ n¶ÉäàÉÉÉÊxÉ  
                     ´ÉänxÉÉºlÉÉ{ÉxÉÉÉÊxÉ £É´ÉÉÎxiÉ ** 47 **  
                                           (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0  4) 
 
                    ãÉÉäwÉºÉÉ´É®ãÉÉäwÉ............... .....¶ÉÉãÉÉ& BÉEnãÉÉÒ SÉäÉÊiÉ ** 14 ** 
                    A−É ®ÉäwÉÉÉÊnÉÊ®iªÉÖBÉDiÉÉä àÉän& B ÉE{ÉEc®Éä MÉhÉ& * 
                    ªÉÉäÉÊxÉnÉä−Éc®& ºiÉà£ÉÉÒ ´ÉhªÉÉæ ÉÊ´ É−ÉÉÊ´ÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉ& ** 15 ** 
                                           (ºÉÖ0 ºÉÚ0  38) 
 
                    +ÉºÉxÉÉÊiÉÉÊxÉ¶É............¶ÉÉBÉ E ¶ÉÉãÉÉè.....UÉMÉBÉEhÉÉÇ`´ÉBÉEhÉÉÇ& * 
                    +ÉºÉxÉÉÉÊnÉÌ´ÉVÉªÉiÉä ÉÎ`´ÉjÉBÉÖE−~ BÉE{ÉEÉÊµÉEàÉÉÒxÉ * 
                    {ÉÉhbÖ®ÉäMÉÆ |ÉàÉäcÆ SÉ àÉänÉänÉä−ÉÉÊx É¤ÉcÇhÉ&  ** 20 ** 
                                          (+É0 Ø0 º ÉÚ0 15) 
 
                    ¶ÉÉãÉ& BÉE−ÉÉªÉÉä OÉÉcªÉ ònMvÉ°ôBÉEÂBÉE{ÉEÉÊxÉÉÊràÉ& ** 809 ** 
                    BÉEhÉÇ®ÉäMÉc®Éä °ôFÉÉä ÉÊ´É−ÉcÉ µÉhÉ¶ ÉÉävÉxÉ& * 
                                      (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0, + ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ,)  CDXXIII   
                                  
 
 
       
¶ÉÉãÉ{ÉhÉÉÔ (ºÉÆ0´É0) 
 
                     AäxtÉß z−É£ªÉÉÊiÉ............................+É`´ÉMÉxvÉÉ * 
                     ÉÎºlÉ®É.................<ÉÊiÉ n¶ ÉäàÉÉÉÊxÉ ¤ÉãªÉÉÉÊxÉ £É´ÉÉÎxiÉ ** 7 ** 
(SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 25)  ÉÊ´ÉnÉÉÊ®MÉxvÉÉ ´Éß−ªÉºÉ´ÉÇnÉä−Éc®ÉhÉÉ àÉÂ ** 40 ** 
(SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 25)  
  
ÉÊ´ÉnÉ®ÉÒMÉxvÉÉ...<ÉÊiÉ n¶ÉäàÉÉÉÊxÉ +ÉÆMÉàÉnÇ|É¶ÉàÉxÉÉÉÊxÉ £É´ ÉÉÎxiÉ ** 44 ** 
                                                                                            
(SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 4) 
 
                                 {ÉÉ]ãÉÉÉÎMxÉàÉxlÉ...........¶ÉÉãÉ{É{ÉhÉÉÔ{ÉßÉÊ`xÉ{ÉhÉÉÔMÉÉ äFÉÖ®BÉEÉ 
               <ÉÊiÉ n¶ÉäàÉÉÉÊxÉ `´ÉªÉlÉÖc®ÉÉÊhÉ £É´ÉÉÎxiÉ ** 38 ** 
                                                          (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 4) 
 
                      ¶ÉÉÉÊãÉ{ÉhÉÉÔ¤ÉãÉÉÉÊ¤Éã´Éè& {ÉßÉÎ¶x É{ÉhªÉÉÇ SÉ ºÉÉÉÊvÉiÉÉ ** 13 ** 
                      nÉÉÊbàÉàãÉÉ ÉÊciÉÉ {ÉäªÉÉ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{É kÉä ºÉàÉÖã¤ÉhÉä * 
                                                      (+É0 Ø0 ÉÊSÉ0 9) 
 
                      ¶ÉÉÉÊãÉ{ÉhÉÉÔ ®ºÉä ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ MÉÖ°ô −hÉÉ ´ÉÉiÉnÉä−ÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ * 
                      ÉÊ´É−ÉàÉV´É®àÉäcÉ¶ÉÇ& ¶ÉÉä{ÉEºÉxiÉÉ{ ÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉÉÒ ** 88 ** 
                                             (vÉ0 É ÊxÉ0, MÉÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      ¶ÉÉãÉ{ÉhÉÉÔ º´ÉÉnÖÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ ´Éß− ªÉÉä−hÉÉ ¤ÉßÆchÉÉÒ MÉÖâó& ** 45 ** 
                      ®ºÉÉªÉxÉÉÒ V´É®`´ÉÉºÉÉÊ´É−ÉnÉä−É jÉªÉÉ{ÉcÉ * 
                      àÉäc¶ÉÉä−ÉBÉßEÉÊàÉSUÉÌnFÉiÉBÉEÉºÉÉÉ ÊiÉºÉÉ®ÉÊVÉiÉÂ ** 46 ** 
                                             (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      ¶ÉÉãÉ{ÉhÉÉÔ ®ºÉä ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ MÉÖ°ô− hÉÉ ´ÉÉiÉnÉä−ÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ *  
                      ÉÊ´É−ÉàÉV´É®àÉäcÉ¶ÉÇ& ¶ÉÉälÉºÉÆiÉÉ{É xÉÉÉÊ¶ÉxÉÉÒ ** 20 **  
                                            (®É0 ÉÊx É0, ¶ÉiÉÉ¿´ÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      ¶ÉÉãÉ{ÉhÉÉÔ MÉÖâó¶UÉÌnV´É®`´ÉÉºÉ ÉÉÊiÉºÉÉ®ÉÊVÉiÉÂ ** 32 ** 
                      ¶ÉÉä−ÉnÉä−ÉjÉªÉc®ÉÒ ¤ÉßÆchªÉÖBÉ DiÉÉ ®ºÉÉªÉxÉÉÒ * 
                      ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ ÉÊ´É−Éc®ÉÒ º´ÉÉnÖ& FÉiÉ BÉEÉºÉBÉßEÉÊàÉ|ÉhÉÖiÉÂ ** 33 ** 
                                         (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, MÉÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      ¶ÉÉÉÊãÉ{ÉhÉÉÔMÉÖ®SUÉÌqV´É®¶´ÉÉºÉ ÉÉÊiÉºÉÉ®ÉÊVÉiÉÂ *  
                      ¶ÉÉä−ÉnÉä−ÉjÉªÉc®ÉÒ¤ÉßÆchªÉÖBÉDi ÉÉ®ºÉÉªÉxÉÉÒ *    CDXXIV                        ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉÉÊ´É−Éc®ÉÒº´ÉÉuÉÒFÉiÉBÉEÉ ºÉBÉßEÉÊàÉ|ÉhÉÖiÉÂ ** 
                                         (¶ÉÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0 , MÉÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.)   
 
 
 
¶ÉàÉÉÒ  ({ÉjÉàÉÂ) 
 
                     +ÉBÉEÇàÉÚãÉÆ  ¶ÉàÉÉÒ{ÉjÉàÉ¶ÉÉæ£ªÉÉä vÉÚ{ÉxÉÆ ÉÊciÉàÉÂ  ** 49 ** 
                                       (SÉ0 ÉÊSÉ0 14 ) 
 
                     +ÉBÉEÇàÉÚãÉÆ ¶ÉàÉÉÒ{ÉjÉÆ............. vÉÚ{ÉxÉÆ ÉÊciÉàÉ¶ÉÇºÉxÉÂ  ** 18 ** 
                                       (+É0 Ø0 ÉÊSÉ0  8) 
 
                     ¶ÉàªÉÉ& {ÉjÉèvÉÇÚÉÊ{ÉiÉÆ iÉtÉ´Éè¶SÉ  * 
                     xÉäjÉäªÉÖBÉDiÉÆ cÉÎxiÉ ºÉxvÉÉ´ÉºÉÆ¶É Æ .................. ** 35 ** 
                                       (+É0 Ø0 =0 1 6) 
 
                      ....¶ÉàªÉÉàÉãÉBÉE {ÉjÉÉVªÉvÉÚÉÊ{Éi ÉÆ ¶ÉÉä{ÉEãÉBÉEÂ|ÉhÉÖiÉ  ** 42 ** 
                                        (+É0 c0 =0 1 6) 
 
                      ¶ÉàÉÉÒ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ BÉE]Ö& ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ BÉE −ÉÉªÉÉ ®äSÉxÉÉÒ  ãÉPÉÖ&  * 
                      BÉE{ÉEBÉEÉºÉ§ÉàÉ¶´ÉÉºÉBÉÖE−~É¶ÉÇ&B ÉßEÉÊàÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ ºàÉßiÉÉ ** 73 ** 
                                (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0 ´É]É ÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      ¶ÉàÉÉÒ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ BÉE]Â´ÉxÉÖ−hÉÉ BÉ E−ÉÉªÉÉ ®ÉäSÉxÉÉÒ ãÉPÉÖ& * 
                      ÉÊxÉcÉÎxiÉ BÉE{ÉEBÉÖE−~É¶ÉÇ& ¶´ÉÉº ÉBÉEÉºÉ §ÉàÉ BÉßEàÉÉÒxÉÂ  ** 1084-85 ** 
                                    (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0 +ÉÉä− ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                       ¶ÉàÉÉÒ °ôFÉÉ BÉE−ÉÉªÉÉ SÉ ®BÉDiÉ ÉÊ{ÉkÉÉÉÊiÉºÉÉ®ÉÊVÉiÉÂ  * 
                       iÉi{ÉEãÉÆ iÉÖ MÉÖâó º´ÉÉnÖ ÉÊiÉBÉDi ÉÉä−hÉÆ BÉEä¶ÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉàÉÂ  ** 35 ** 
                               (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0 ¶ÉÉãÉàÉãªÉ ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
 
ºÉÉè®£É ÉÊxÉà¤É ({ÉjÉàÉÂ) 
 
                      1. BÉEèbªªÉÇ& BÉE]ÖBÉEÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉ& BÉE−ÉÉªÉ& ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉä ãÉPÉÖ & * 
                         ºÉxiÉÉ{É ¶ÉÉä−ÉBÉÖE−~É ò BÉßEÉÊàÉ£ÉÚiÉÉÊ´É−ÉÉ{Éc& ** 14 **  
                                             (®É0 É ÊxÉ0,) 
                                             (|É£Ép ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      2. BÉEèbªªÉÇ& ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉ& BÉE]Ö¶SÉ iÉÖ´É®Éä ãÉPÉÖ & * 
                        nÉcÉ¶ÉÇ& BÉßEÉÊàÉ¶ÉÚãÉPxÉ& ºÉxiÉ É{ÉÉÊ´É−ÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉ&  ** 
                        ¶ÉÉä{ÉEBÉEhbÚ £ÉÚiÉ¤ÉÉvÉÉ xÉÉ¶É ªÉäÉÊnÉÊiÉ BÉEÉÒÉÌiÉiÉ& ** 
                                              (ÉÊxÉ0  ®0) 
  CDXXV  
                              ¶ãÉä−àÉÉiÉBÉE ({ÉEãÉàÉ Â) 
 
              {ÉEãÉàÉÉàÉÆiÉÖ ÉÊ´É−]ÉÉÎà£É °ôFÉÆ  ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉ òÉÊVÉiÉÂ * 
              iÉi{ÉBÉD´ÉÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ÉÎºxÉMvÉÆ ¶ãÉä−àÉãÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒi ÉãÉÆ MÉÖ°ô * 
                                          (£ÉÉ0 |É0  ÉÊxÉ0) 
              
   ¶ãÉä−àÉÉiÉBÉEÉä ÉÊcàÉ& º´ÉÉnÖ ºªÉÉnÂ °ôFÉ& ÉÊ{ÉÉÎSUãÉ& ¶ÉÖÉ ÊSÉ&  ** 85 ** 
                                        (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉ©ÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
              cÉÎxiÉ cªÉÉºªÉ {ÉEãÉÆ iÉÖ ¶ÉÉÒiÉàÉvÉÖ®Æ ÉÊiÉB ÉDiÉÆ ãÉPÉÖºiÉÖ´É®àÉÂ * 
              ´ÉÉªÉÉä´ÉÇßÉÊrBÉE®Æ SÉ ÉÊ{ÉkÉ¶ÉàÉxÉÆ ÉÊ´É−]ÆÉÊ£ É °ôSªÉÆ iÉlÉÉ 
              ºÉßMoÉÏ−] BÉE{ÉExÉÉ¶ÉxÉÆ SÉ MÉÉÊniÉÆ {ÉBÉD´ ÉÆ iÉlÉÉ àÉÉvÉÖ®àÉÂ  ** 
              ÉÎºxÉMvÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉ¤ÉßÆchÉÆ ÉÊxÉMÉÉÊniÉÆ ÉÊ´É− ]ÆÉÊ£É °ôFÉÆ MÉÖ°ô  
              ´ÉÉªÉÉäxÉÉ¶ÉBÉE®Æ SÉ ÉÊ{ÉkÉ¶ÉàÉxÉÆ ºªÉÉpBÉ DiÉnÉä−ÉÉ{ÉcàÉÂ * 
                                           (ÉÊxÉ0 ®0 ) 
 
              ¶ãÉä−àÉãÉÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ¶ÉÉÒiÉÆ ¶ãÉä−àÉÉiÉBÉE{ÉEãÉÆ MÉÖ°ô  * 
                                            (SÉ0 ºÉ Ú0 27) 
 
              {ÉEãÉÆ iÉÖ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ ´ÉÉiÉãÉ Æ ãÉPÉÖ ** 615 ** 
              BÉE−ÉÉªÉÆ BÉE]ÖBÉEÆ {ÉÉBÉEä OÉÉÉÊc ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉ E{ÉEÉ òÉÊVÉiÉÂ * 
              iÉiÉÂ {ÉBÉD´ÉÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ÉÎºxÉMvÉÆ ¶ãÉä−àÉãÉÆ ¶É ÉÒiÉãÉÆ MÉÖ°ô  ** 616 ** 
                                        (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0,  +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
        
                            ¶ãÉä−àÉÉiÉBÉE (¶ÉÉ0 i´ÉB ÉEÂ) 
  
              ¤ÉcÖ´ÉÉ®Éä ÉÊ´É−Éº{ÉEÉä] µÉhÉ´ÉÉÒºÉ{ÉÇBÉÖE− ~xÉÖiÉÂ * 
              àÉvÉÖ®ºiÉÖ´É®ÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉ& BÉEä¶ªÉ`SÉ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{É kÉ¿iÉÂ ** 106 ** 
                               (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉ© ÉÉÉÊn {ÉEãÉ ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
              ¶ãÉä−àÉÉiÉBÉEÉä ÉÊcàÉ& º´ÉÉnÖ °ôFÉ& ÉÊ{ÉÉÎSUãÉ & ¶ÉÖÉÊSÉ& * 
                                (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉ©ÉÉÉÊn  ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
              ¶ãÉä−àÉÉiÉBÉE& BÉE]ÖÉÊcàÉÉä àÉvÉÖ®& BÉE−ÉÉªÉ&  
              º´ÉÉnÖ`SÉ {ÉÉSÉxÉBÉE®& BÉßEÉÊàÉ¶ÉÚãÉcÉ®ÉÒ * 
              +ÉÉàÉÉ ònÉä−ÉàÉãÉÉ´É®ÉävÉ¤ÉcÖµÉhÉÉÉÌkÉ 
              ÉÊ´Éº{ÉEÉä]¶ÉÉÉÎxiÉBÉE®hÉ& BÉE{ÉEBÉEÉ®BÉE`SÉ ** 20 ** 
                                  (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉ©ÉÉ ÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
               ¶ãÉä−àÉÉiÉBÉE]Ö¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ SÉ iÉÖ´É®Æ ºªÉÉi{É ÉSÉBÉEÆ àÉÉvÉÖ®Æ  
               ÉÎºxÉMvÉÆ BÉEä¶ªÉ´ÉãÉÉºÉnÆ i´ÉlÉ BÉßEàÉÉÒSU ÚãÉÉàÉ®BÉDiÉÉ{ÉcàÉÂ  * 
               ÉÊ´Éº{ÉEÉä] µÉhÉÉÊ{ÉkÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉBÉE®Æ ´ÉÉÒºÉ{ ÉÇºÉ´ÉÇ ÉÊ´É−ÉÆ ** 
                                        (ÉÊxÉ0 ®0)  CDXXVI   
              ¶ÉäãÉÖ& BÉEä¶ªÉ& ºÉÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉä−hÉÉä àÉvÉÖ®ºi ÉÖ´É®& BÉE]Ö&  ** 614 ** 
              ÉÊ´É−É´ÉÉÒºÉ{ÉÇÉÊ´Éº{ÉEÉä]µÉhÉÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉE|ÉhÉ ÖiÉÂ * 
                                     (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0, +É Éä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
 
º{ÉßBÉDBÉEÉ (ºÉÆ0 ´É0) 
 
                     ¶ÉèãÉäªÉ BÉÖE−~ÉMÉÖ°ônÉâóBÉEÉèxiÉÉÒ i´ ÉBÉD{ÉPxÉ BÉEãÉÉà¤ÉÖ {ÉãÉÉ¶ÉàÉÖºiÉè * 
                     ÉÊ|ÉªÉÆMÉÖlÉÉèhÉäªÉBÉEcäàÉàÉÉÆºÉÉÒiÉÉãÉÉÒ¶ É{ÉjÉ {ãÉ´É {ÉjÉvÉÉxªÉè ** 65 ** 
                     FÉÉÒ´Éäº]BÉEvªÉÉàÉBÉE ÉÊ{É{{ÉãÉÉÒÉÊ£É&  º{ÉßBÉDBÉEÉ xÉJÉè`SÉè´É ªÉlÉÉä{ÉãÉÉ£ÉàÉÂ * 
                     ´ÉÉiÉÉÉÎx´ÉiÉä%£ªÉMÉàÉÖ¶ÉÉÎxiÉ iÉèãÉ  ÉÊºÉr ºÉÖÉÊ{É−]è®ÉÊ{É SÉ |ÉnäcàÉÂ ** 66 ** 
                                                  ( SÉ0 ÉÊSÉ0 12) 
 
                      AãÉÉiÉMÉ® BÉÖE−~.............. ...BÉÖExnÖ°ôBÉEÉMÉÖ°ôº{ÉßBÉDBÉEÉBÉEÉä¶ÉÉÒ® £Ép 
                      nÉ°ôBÉÖEBÉÖEàÉÉxÉ {ÉÖxxÉÉMÉBÉEä¶É ®Æ SÉäÉÊiÉ ** 24 ** 
                      AãÉÉÉÊnBÉEÉä ´ÉÉiÉBÉE{ÉEÉè ÉÊxÉcxªÉ ÉÉÊu−ÉàÉä´ÉSÉ * 
                      ´ÉhÉÇ|ÉºÉÉnxÉ& BÉEhbÚ ÉÊ{ÉbBÉEÉBÉEÉ ä~xÉÉ¶ÉxÉ& ** 25 ** 
                                                  ( ºÉÖ0 ºÉÖ0 38) 
 
                     º{ÉßBÉDBÉEÉ BÉE]ÖBÉE−ÉÉªÉÉ SÉ ÉÊi ÉBÉDiÉÉ ¶ãÉä−àÉÉÉÌkÉBÉEÉºÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ * 
                     ¶ãÉä−àÉàÉäcÉ¶àÉ®ÉÒBÉßE−UÅ xÉÉ¶ÉxÉÉÒ SÉ ºÉÖMÉxvÉnÉ ** 128 **     
                                      (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, SÉ xnxÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                     º{ÉßBÉDBÉEÉ º´ÉÉuÉÒ ÉÊcàÉÉ ´Éß−ªÉÉ  ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ ÉÊxÉÉÊJÉãÉnÉä−ÉxÉÖiÉÂ * 
                     BÉÖE−~BÉEhbÖÉÊ´É−Éº´ÉännÉcPxÉÉÒ V´ É®BÉDiÉ¿iÉÂ ** 126 ** 
                                                             (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, BÉE{ÉÇÚ®ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,)  
 
 
                                                                            ´ÉÉ´ÉßFÉ ({ÉEãÉàÉÂ) 
 
                     xÉÉÒ{ÉÆ ¶ÉiÉÉÿ´ÉBÉEÆ {ÉÉÒãÉÖ iÉßhÉ¶ÉÚxªÉÆ ÉÊ´ÉBÉE‰iÉàÉÂ * 
                     |ÉÉSÉÉÒxÉÉàÉãÉBÉEÆ SÉè´É nÉä−ÉPxÉÆ MÉ®cÉÉÊ® SÉ ** 145-146 ** 
                                                   (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 27) 
 
                     |ÉàÉäcä- gÉ³~MÉÉ]BÉEÉÊMÉãÉÉäbªÉ...... ÉÊ´ÉBÉE‰iÉä−ÉÖ ´ÉÉ * 
                     ªÉ´ÉÉxxÉÉÊ´ÉBÉEÉ®ÉÆ`SÉ ºÉä´ÉäiÉ ** 1 0 ** 
                                                   (ºÉÖ0 ÉÊSÉ0 11) 
 
           cÉÒ¤Éä®´ÉèBÉEÆBÉEiÉ........´É®É‹àÉÂ * 
                      ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉÉÊxÉãÉãÉÚiÉÉ& {ÉÉxÉÉ\ VÉxÉxÉºªÉãÉä{ÉºÉäBÉEäxÉ ** 85 ** 
                                                  ( +É0 Ø0 =0 37) 
 
             òÖ´ÉpÖàÉÇPÉÖ®ÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉ& BÉE−ÉÉªÉ& ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉä VÉªÉäiÉÂ * 
                      ¤ÉãÉÉºÉÉÊ{ÉkÉ¶ÉÉä{ÉEÉ»ÉÆ {ÉEãÉÆ {ÉÉ BÉE®ºÉÉä−ÉhÉàÉÂ ** 406 **  CDXXVII                        iÉÉÒFhÉÆ ÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ»ÉBÉßEiÉÂ {ÉBÉD´ÉÆ º ´ÉÉnÖ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ ÉÊjÉnÉä−ÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ  
                                             (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊPÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     ÉÊ´ÉBÉE‰iÉÉä%àãÉàÉvÉÖ®& {ÉÉBÉEä%ÉÊiÉàÉ vÉÖ®Éä ãÉPÉÖ& * 
                     nÉÒ{ÉxÉ& BÉEÉàÉãÉÉ»ÉPxÉ& {ÉÉSÉxÉ&  ÉÊ{ÉkÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉ& ** 155 ** 
                                            (®É0ÉÊxÉ 0, |É£ÉpÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     ÉÊ´ÉBÉE‰iÉ{ÉEãÉÆ {ÉBÉD´ÉÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ºÉ´É ÇnÉä−ÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ ** 88 ** 
                                      (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ 0, +ÉÉ©ÉÉÉÊn{ÉEãÉ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
 
ºlÉÚãÉAãÉÉ ({ÉEãÉàÉÂ) 
 
                     ºlÉÚãÉèãÉÉ ®ÉäSÉxÉÉÒ iÉÉÒFhÉÉ ãÉPÉÚ −hÉÉ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ ** 25 ** 
                     ØããÉÉºÉÉÊ´É−É¤ÉºiªÉÉºªÉÉÊ¶É®ÉäâóM ´ÉÉÊàÉBÉEÉºÉxÉÖiÉÂ ** 26 ** 
                                              (àÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, BÉE{ÉÇÚ®ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     AãÉÉ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ SÉ ãÉP´ÉÉÒ ºªÉÉiB ÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉÉÊ´É−ÉµÉhÉÉxÉÂ  * 
                     ¤ÉÉÎºiÉBÉEhbÖâóVÉÉä cÉÎxiÉ àÉÖJÉàÉºiÉ BÉE¶ÉÉäÉÊvÉxÉÉÒ ** 47 ** 
                                            (vÉ0 ÉÊx É0, ¶ÉiÉ{ÉÖ−{ÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     £ÉpèãÉÉ BÉE]ÖBÉEÉ {ÉÉBÉEä ®ºÉä ÉÊ{Ék ÉÉÉÎMxÉBÉßEiÉÂ ãÉPÉÖ& ** 1343 ** 
                     °ôFÉÉä−hÉÉ ®ÉäSÉxÉÉÒ BÉEÉºÉBÉE{ÉE´ÉÉ iÉÉ»É`´ÉÉºÉcÉ * 
                     cÉÎxiÉ ØããÉÉºÉiÉß]ÂBÉEhbÚÉÊ¶É®Éä´Éºi ªÉÉºªÉâóM´ÉàÉÉÒ& ** 1344 ** 
                                              (BÉEè0  ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
       AãÉÉuªÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉÊiÉBÉDiÉàÉÖBÉDiÉÆ ºÉÖMÉÉÎxvÉ ÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ ÉÌiÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcÉÉÊ® * 
                     BÉE®ÉäÉÊiÉ ØpÉäMÉàÉãÉÉÉÊkÉ¤ÉÉÎºiÉ¶ÉÚã ÉPxÉàÉjÉ ºlÉÉÊ´É®É MÉÖhÉÉfªÉÉ ** 87 ** 
(®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, ÉÊ{É{{ÉãªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.)   
                    ºlÉÚãÉèãÉÉ BÉE]ÖBÉEÉ {ÉÉBÉEä ®ºÉä 
SÉÉxÉãÉBÉßEiÉÂ ãÉPÉÖ& * 
                      °ôFÉÉä−hÉÉ ¶ãÉä−àÉÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ»ÉBÉEhbÚ¶ ´ÉÉºÉiÉß−ÉÉ%{ÉcÉ * 
                      ØããÉÉºÉÉÊ´É−É¤ÉºiªÉÉºªÉÉÊ¶É®Éäâó BÉEÂ´ÉÉÊàÉBÉEÉºÉxÉÖiÉÂ ** 62 ** 
                                                              (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, BÉE{ÉÇÚ®ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.)  CDXXVIII                                                       ¶ÉÖBÉExÉÉºÉÉ (|ÉBÉExn) 
 
                     +ÉiÉ& ºÉ´Éæ−ÉÉàÉä´É pBªÉÉhªÉÖ{ÉnäF ªÉÉàÉ&  * 
                     iÉtÉlÉÉ-ÉÊ{É{{ÉãªÉÉÉÊn& ºÉÖ®ºÉÉÉ Ên&...... 
                     .......¶ÉÖBÉExÉÉºÉÉ {ÉÉÒãÉÖ|É£ÉßiÉ ÉÒÉÊxÉ ºÉÉãÉºÉÉ®ÉÉÊn`SÉ 
                     |ÉÉªÉ¶É& BÉE]ÖBÉEÉä ´ÉMÉÇ& ** 11 ** 
                                              (ºÉÖ0 ºÉÚ0 42) 
 
                     ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉ& BÉExnÉä ÉÊ´É®äBÉEÉÒ SÉ ¶ÉÉ älÉPxÉÉä ´ÉÉàÉBÉE& ºàÉßiÉ& * 
                     ÉÊ´É−ÉPxÉ& {ÉÉxÉãÉä{ÉÉ£ªÉÉÆ ÉÊ¶Éà¤É ÉÒ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ SÉ iÉÖ´É®É ** 
                                         (¶ÉÉä0) 
 
                     ÉÊ´É−Éä- 
                     ¶ÉÖBÉExÉÉºÉÉ|ÉÉÊiÉÉÊ´É−ÉÉBªÉÉQÉÉÒàÉ ÚãÉè`SÉ ãÉä{ÉªÉäiÉÂ ** 47 ** 
                                             (+É0 ¿ 0 =0 35) 
 
                                                 
¶´ÉäiÉ´ÉäiÉºÉ ({ÉjÉàÉÂ) 
 
                     ´ÉäiÉºÉºªÉ uªÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉÆ ®FÉÉäPxÉÆ µÉ hÉ¶ÉÉävÉxÉàÉÂ * 
                     ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉc®Æ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ ºÉBÉE−ÉÉª ÉÆ BÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcàÉÂ  ** 108 ** 
                                                (vÉ 0 ÉÊxÉ0 +ÉÉ©ÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                                        
                                 iÉBÉDBÉEÉäãÉ ({ÉEãÉ àÉÂ) 
 
              ºÉÖ®ÉÊ£É& º´ÉÉnÖ iÉBÉDBÉEÉäãÉÆ nÉÒ{ÉxÉÆ {ÉÉS ÉxÉÆ SÉ iÉiÉÂ * 
              BÉE{ÉEPxÉÆ ®ÉäSÉxÉÆ ¿tÉÆ MÉÖãàÉ¶ÉÚãÉÉÉÊnxÉÉ¶ÉxÉ àÉÂ ** º´É0 ** 
                                  (<Æ0 àÉä0 {ãÉÄ BÉßEi É BÉEÉä^ÉBÉDBÉEãÉ,) 
 
                                                   
ÉÊiÉxnÖBÉE ({ÉEãÉàÉÂ) 
 
                     ÉÊiÉxnÖBÉEÉÊ|ÉªÉÉãÉ.............. ºÉ{iÉ{ÉhÉÉÇ`´ÉBÉEhÉÉÇVÉÇÖxÉÉºÉxÉÉÉÊ®àÉänÉ  
         <ÉÊiÉ n¶ÉäàÉÉxªÉÖnnÇ|É¶ÉàÉxÉÉÉÊxÉ £É´ÉÉÎxiÉ ** 43 ** 
                                             (SÉ0 º ÉÚ0 4) 
 
                      ÉÊiÉxnÖBÉEàÉxÉxxÉpBªÉâóÉÊSÉBÉE®Éh ÉÉàÉ ** 40 ** 
                                           (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 25) 
                     ÉÊiÉxnÖBÉEÆ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉPxÉÆ BÉE−ÉÉª ÉÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ãÉPÉÖ ** 147 ** 
                                             (SÉ0 º ÉÚ0 27) 
 
                     xªÉOÉÉä vÉÉänÖà¤É®É¶´ÉilÉ{ãÉFÉ ¤É n®ÉÒÉÊiÉxnÖBÉEÉÒ....xÉxnÉÒ´ÉßFÉ¶SÉäÉÊiÉ ** 48 **  
 
                     xªÉOÉÉävÉÉÉÊnMÉÇhÉÉä µÉhªÉ ºÉÆOÉÉc ÉÒ £ÉMxÉºÉÉvÉBÉE& *  CDXXIX                       ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉc®Éä nÉcàÉänÉäPxÉÉä ªÉÉäÉ ÊxÉnÉä−ÉØiÉÂ ** 49 ** 
                                            (ºÉÖ0 ºÉ Ú0 38) 
                     +ÉÉàÉÆ BÉE−ÉÉªÉÆ ºÉÆOÉÉÉÊc ÉÊiÉxnÖBÉ EÆ ´ÉÉiÉBÉEÉä{ÉxÉàÉÂ * 
                     ÉÊ´É{ÉÉBÉEä MÉÖâó ºÉÆ{ÉBÉD´ÉÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ ** 168 ** 
                                            (ºÉÖ0 ºÉ Ú0 46) 
 
                      +ÉÉàÉÆ BÉE−ÉÉªÉÆ ºÉÆOÉÉÉÊc ÉÊiÉxnÖB ÉEÆ ´ÉÉiÉBÉEÉä{ÉxÉàÉÂ * 
                      ÉÊ´É{ÉÉBÉEä MÉÖâó ºÉÆ{ÉBÉD´ÉÆ àÉvÉÖ® Æ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ ** 36 **  
                                       (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, + ÉÉ©ÉÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                      +ÉÉàÉÆ SÉÉºªÉ {ÉEãÉÆ º´ÉÉnÖ BÉE−ÉÉ ªÉÆ ãÉäJÉxÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ * 
                      ºÉÆOÉÉÉÊc ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ °ôFÉÆ ÉÊ´É¤ÉxvÉÉ % âóÉÊSÉ´ÉÉiÉBÉßEiÉÂ ** 402 ** 
                      {ÉBÉD´ÉÆ ¤ÉãÉÉºÉ ÉÊ{ÉkÉPxÉÆ º´ÉÉn Ö{ÉÉBÉE®ºÉÆ MÉÖâó * 
                                     (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0, +É Éä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                     ÉÊiÉxnÖBÉEºiÉÖ BÉE−ÉÉªÉ& ºªÉÉiÉÂ º ÉÆOÉÉcÉÒ ´ÉÉiÉBÉßEi{É®& * 
                     {ÉBÉD´ÉºiÉÖ àÉvÉÖ®& ÉÎºxÉMvÉÉä nÖVÉÇ ®& ¶ãÉä−àÉãÉÉä MÉÖâó& ** 78 ** 
                                     (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉ ©ÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                     ºªÉÉnÉàÉÆ ÉÊiÉxnÖBÉEÆ OÉÉÉÊc ´ÉÉiÉã ÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ ** 
                     {ÉBÉD´ÉÆ ÉÊ{ÉkÉ|ÉàÉäcÉ»É¶ãÉä−àÉPxÉÆ àÉ vÉÖ®Æ MÉÖâó ** 65 ** 
                               (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉ© ÉÉÉÊn{ÉEãÉ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                      +ÉÉàÉÆ SÉÉºªÉ{ÉEãÉÆ ÉÎºxÉMvÉÆ BÉE−É ÉªÉÆ ãÉäJÉxÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ * 
                      ºÉÆOÉÉÉÊc ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ °ôFÉÆ ÉÊ´É¤ÉxvÉÉ âóÉÊSÉ´ÉÉiÉBÉßEiÉÂ ** 
                      {ÉBÉD´ÉÆ ÉÊ{ÉkÉ|ÉàÉäcÉ»ÉcªÉ¶àÉPxÉÆ àÉ vÉÖ®Æ MÉÖâó * 
                      º´ÉÉnÖ {ÉÉBÉE®ºÉÆ ÉÎºxÉMvÉÆ nÖVÉÇ® Æ ´ÉÉiÉxÉÉ¶ÉBÉEàÉÂ **  
                                   (¶ÉÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, {ÉEã É ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
 
                                
jÉÉªÉàÉÉhÉÉ (|ÉBÉExn) 
 
              jÉÉªÉxiÉÉÒ iÉÖ´É®É ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ ºÉ®É ÉÊ{ÉkÉB ÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcÉ * 
              V´É®¿pÉäMÉ MÉÖãàÉÉ¶ÉÉæ§ÉàÉ¶ÉÚãÉÉÊ´É−É|ÉhÉÖiÉÂ ** 243 ** 
                                  (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, MÉ ÖbÖSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
              jÉÉªÉxiÉÉÒ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ òMÉÖãàÉV´É®c®É àÉiÉÉ  * 
              =−hÉÉ BÉE]Ö BÉE−ÉÉªÉÉ SÉ ºÉÚÉÊiÉBÉEÉ¶ÉÚãÉxÉ ÉÉÊ¶ÉxÉÉÒ ** 247 ** 
                                      (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0, MÉÖb ÖSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
              
 jÉÉªÉxiÉÉÒ iÉÖ´É®É ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ ºÉ®É ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcÉ * 
              V´É®¿pÉäMÉ MÉÖãàÉÉ¶ÉÉæ §ÉàÉ¶ÉÚãÉÉÊ´É−É|ÉhÉÖiÉ Â ** 1031 ** 
                                      (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0, + ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
  CDXXX               jÉÉªÉxiÉÉÒ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ òMÉÖãàÉV´É®c®É ºÉ®É * 
                                      (ºÉÉä0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
 
 
 
                        iÉÖ´É®BÉE (¤ÉÉÒVÉàÉÂ) 
 
               +ÉÉ°ô−BÉE®Æ iÉÉè´É®BÉEÆ BÉE−ÉÉªÉÆ BÉE]Ö{ÉÉ ÉÊBÉE SÉ * 
               =−hÉÆ BÉßEÉÊàÉV´É®ÉxÉÉcàÉäcÉänÉ´ÉiÉÇxÉÉ¶ÉxÉ àÉÂ ** 196 ** 
                                                 (º ÉÖ0 ºÉÚ0 46) 
 
                iÉÖ´É®BÉE£ÉããÉÉiÉBÉEiÉèãÉä =−hÉä àÉvÉÖ® BÉ E−ÉÉªÉä ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉxÉÖ®ºÉä  
                ´ÉÉiÉBÉE{ÉEBÉÖE−~àÉänÉäàÉäcBÉßEÉÊàÉ|É¶ÉàÉxÉä = £ÉªÉiÉÉä£ÉÉMÉnÉä−Éc®ä SÉ  ** 122 ** 
                                                 (º ÉÖ0 ºÉÚ0 45) 
 
                iÉÉè´É®Æ BÉE]ÖBÉEÆ {ÉÉBÉEä BÉE−ÉÉªÉÉä−hÉ Æ BÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcàÉÂ ** 504 ** 
                BÉßEÉÊàÉBÉÖE−~V´É®ÉxÉÉcàÉäÁÉ¶ÉÉæµÉhÉ¶ÉÉä{ÉEÉ ÊVÉiÉÂ * 
                                        (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0,  +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                           
 
                     >ó−ÉxnÉÒ (ºÉÆ0 ´É0) 
 
                     >ó−ÉxpªÉÉÆ ÉÊ£ÉººÉ]É |ÉÉäBÉDiÉÉ iÉ bÉMÉàÉßÉÊkÉBÉEÉänÂ£É´ÉÉ * 
                                                        (ºÉÉä0 ÉÊxÉ0 696)  
 
 
 
´ÉXÉÉxxÉ ({ÉjÉ´ÉßxiÉ) 
 
                      ´ÉXÉÉxxÉÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ °ôFÉàÉÖ−hÉÆ ¤ÉãªÉ Æ SÉ nÖVÉÇ®àÉÂ * 
                      ´ÉÉiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE®Æ {ÉÖÆºi´Éc®àÉÉÎMxÉ  |ÉnÉÒ{ÉxÉàÉ Â ** 
                            (p0 MÉÖ0 ÉÊ´É0-BÉßEiÉ |ÉÉä0  ÉÊ|É0 µÉ0* ¶ÉàÉÉÇ) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
´ÉäjÉ (|ÉBÉExn) 
 
                     àÉhbÚBÉE{ÉhÉÉÔ ´ÉäjÉÉOÉÆ BÉÖESÉäãÉÉ ´ ÉxÉÉÊiÉBÉDiÉBÉEàÉÂ * 
                     BÉEBÉEÉæ]BÉEÉ´ÉãMÉÖVÉBÉEÉè {É]ÉäãÉÆ ¶É BÉÖEãÉÉnxÉÉÒ *  CDXXXI                       ´Éß−É{ÉÖ−{ÉÉÉÊhÉ ¶ÉÉ‹æ−]É BÉEäà¤É ÖBÉEÆ ºÉBÉEÉÊ]ããÉBÉEàÉÂ ** 96 ** 
                     xÉÉbÉÒ BÉEãÉÉªÉÆ MÉÉäÉÊVÉcÂ´ÉÉ ´ÉÉiÉ ÉÇBÉEÆ ÉÊiÉãÉ{ÉÉÌhÉBÉEÉ * 
                     BÉEÉèãÉBÉEÆ BÉEÉBÉEÇ¶ÉÆ xÉèà¤ÉÆ ¶ÉÉBÉEÆ {ÉÉ{ÉÇ]BÉEÆ SÉ ªÉiÉÂ ** 
                     BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉc®Æ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉÆ BÉE]Ö ÉÊ´É{ÉSªÉiÉä * 
                                            (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 27) 
 
                     +ÉÉ]°ô−ÉBÉE´ÉäjÉÉOÉMÉÖbÚSÉÉÒÉÊxÉà¤É{ É{ÉÇ]É& * 
                     ÉÊBÉE®ÉiÉÉÊiÉÉÎBÉDiÉºÉÉÊciÉÉÉÎºiÉB ÉDiÉÉ& ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcÉ& ** 270 **  
                                                (ºÉ Ö0 ºÉÚ0 46) 
 
                     ¶ÉÉÒiÉÆ ÉÊ´É{ÉÉBÉEä BÉE]ÖBÉEÆ BÉßEÉÊàÉP xÉÆ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ ãÉPÉÖOÉÉÉÊc ÉÊxÉcÉÎxiÉ ÉÊ{ÉkÉàÉÂ * 
                     àÉäcÆ ¤ÉãÉÉºÉÆ SÉ BÉE®ÉäÉÊiÉ ´ÉÉiÉÆ ´ ÉäjÉÉOÉàÉÖBÉDiÉÆ âóÉÊSÉBÉßEnÂ ÉÊ´É¶Éä−ÉÉiÉÂ ** 1252 ** 
                                         (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0 , +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                     ´ÉäiÉºÉ& ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉä nÉc¶ÉÉälÉÉ¶ÉÉæª ÉÉäÉÊxÉâóBÉEÂ|ÉhÉÖiÉÂ * 
                     cÉÎxiÉ ´ÉÉÒºÉ{ÉÇ BÉßESUÅÉ»ÉÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ¶àÉ ÉÊ®BÉE{ÉEÉÉÊxÉãÉÉxÉÂ ** 136 ** 
                                   (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, MÉÖbÚSªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ,) 
 
                     ´ÉäjÉºiÉÖ iÉÖ´É®& ¶ÉÉÒiÉ& ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉ&  BÉE]Ö BÉE{ÉEÉ{Éc& * 
                     ´ÉÉiÉÆ ÉÊ{ÉkÉÆ SÉ nÉc\ÉÂSÉ ¶ÉÉä{ÉE¶É Éæ%¶àÉÉÊ®BÉßESUÅÉBÉEÉxÉÂ **  
                     ÉÊ´ÉºÉ{ÉÉÇÉÊiÉºÉÉ®Æ ®BÉDiÉÆ ªÉÉäÉÊxÉ®É äMÉÆ iÉß−ÉÉÆ VÉªÉäiÉÂ * 
                     ®BÉDiÉnÉä−ÉÆ µÉhÉÆ àÉäcÆ ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉ\ ÉÂSÉ BÉÖE−~BÉEàÉÂ ** 
                     ÉÊ´É−ÉÆ ´Éè xÉÉ¶ÉªÉiªÉä´ÉÉÆBÉÖE®É&  FÉÉ®Éä ãÉPÉÖ& ºàÉßiÉ& * 
                     BÉE]Ú−hÉ& BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉPxÉ& {ÉhÉÇ £É änBÉE®Æ àÉiÉàÉÂ ** 
                     iÉÖ´É®Æ ãÉPÉÖ¶ÉÉÒiÉ\ÉÂSÉ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ BÉ E]ÖSÉ ´ÉÉiÉãÉàÉÂ * 
                     ®BÉDiÉnÉä−ÉÆ BÉE{ÉEÆ ÉÊ{ÉkÉÆ xÉÉ¶ÉªÉ äÉÊnÉÊiÉ BÉEÉÒÉÌkÉiÉàÉÂ **   
                             (ÉÊxÉ0 ®0) 
 
 
 
ÉÊ´É−ÉÉÉÊxÉBÉEÉ (ºÉÆ0 ´É0) 
 
                     BÉE®à£ÉÉ BÉEBÉEÇ¶ÉÉ pÉähÉÉÒ nÉÒPÉÇ´É ßxiÉÉäkÉàÉÉ®hÉÉÒ * 
                     <xnÉÒ´É®É ªÉÖMàÉ{ÉEãÉÉ ºÉÖgÉähÉÉÒ xÉÉÊã ÉBÉEÉ àÉiÉÉ  **    
                                    (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
                            
=kÉàÉÉ®ÉÊhÉBÉEÉ ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ BÉE−ÉÉªÉÉ µÉhÉ¶ÉÉävÉxÉÉÒ * 
                     VÉªÉänÂ npÚàÉÚjÉBÉßESUÅMÉ£ÉÇªÉÉäÉÊxÉ°ôVÉ ÉÉÊxÉãÉÉxÉÂ ** 
                     ¶ÉÉBÉEàÉÖkÉàÉ´ÉÉ°ôhªÉÉ =−hÉ´ÉÉÒªÉÈ ºÉ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉBÉEàÉÂ * 
                     +É¶ÉÇ&BÉÖE−~BÉßEÉÊàÉc®Æ BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉÉÊ´ ÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉàÉÂ ** 
                     {ÉEãÉàÉÖkÉàÉ´ÉÉ°ôhªÉÉ ºÉFÉÉ®Æ nÉÒ{ÉxÉ Æ ãÉPÉÖ * 
                              BÉE]Ö−hÉÆ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉÊ´É¶ÉnÆ BÉE{ÉEPxÉÆ ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉEÉä{ÉxÉàÉÂÂ  ** 804 **    
                                  (BÉEè0ÉÊxÉ0, +ÉÉä−ÉÉ ÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
                            
<xnÉÒ´É®É ªÉÖMàÉ{ÉEãÉÉ nÉÒPÉÇ´ÉßkÉÉäkÉàÉÉ®hÉÉÒ *  CDXXXII                        {ÉÖ−{ÉàÉ\ÉÂVÉÉÊ®BÉEÉ pÉähÉÉÒ xÉÉÊãÉ BÉEÉ SÉ ºÉÉ  **     
                                (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
 
                      <xnÉÒ´É®É BÉE]Ö& ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ ÉÊ{ÉkÉ¶ãÉ ä−àÉÉ{ÉcÉÉÊ®BÉEÉ * 
                      SÉFÉÖ−ªÉÉ BÉEÉºÉnÉä−ÉPxÉÉÒ µÉhÉ BÉßEÉÊàÉc®É {É®É  **    
                               (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
 
                      npÖPxÉÉ àÉÚjÉBÉßESUÅPxÉÉÒ BÉE−ÉÉªÉÉ  µÉhÉ¶ÉÉävÉxÉÉÒ * 
                      MÉ£ÉÇPxÉÉÒ ªÉÉäÉÊxÉ¶ÉÚãÉPxÉÉÒ BÉE{ÉEP xÉÉÒ SÉÉäkÉàÉÉ®hÉÉÒ  **   
                                (àÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0) 
                          
     FÉäjÉYÉ£ÉÚ−ÉÉ V´É®ÉÊVÉuÉiÉPxÉÉÒ ¶ÉÉä{ÉExÉÉÉÊ¶ÉxÉÉÒ  *  
                                (Ø0 ÉÊ|É0) 
                          
     =kÉÉÊ®hÉÉÒ iÉÖ BÉE]ÖBÉEÉ ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ xÉäjªÉÉ ãÉPÉÖ ºàÉßiÉÉ * 
                      =−hÉÉ ÉÎºxÉMvÉÉ ºÉÉ®BÉEÉ SÉ iÉÖ´ É®É µÉhÉ®Éä{ÉhÉÉÒ ** 
                      BÉEÉºÉµÉhÉBÉßEÉÊàÉ`´ÉÉºÉV´É®ÉÊ{ÉkÉ| ÉàÉäcBÉEÉxÉÂ * 
                      BÉE{ÉEBÉÖE−~|ÉãÉÉ{ÉÉÆ¶SÉ ´ÉÉiÉÆ i ÉxpÉÆ SÉ npÖBÉEàÉÂ ** 
                      FÉªÉBÉEÉºÉÆ àÉÚjÉBÉßESUÅÆ ªÉÉäÉÊxÉ®ÉäM ÉÆ SÉ ¶ÉÉälÉBÉEàÉÂ * 
                      xÉÉ¶ÉªÉäÉÊnÉÊiÉ ºÉÆ|ÉÉäBÉDiÉÉ ºÉÖ JÉ|ÉºÉ´ÉBÉEÉÉÊ®hÉÉÒ  **   
                                (ÉÊxÉ0 ®0) 
 
 
nÉãÉSÉÉÒx ÉÉÒ(iÉèãÉàÉÂ) 
 
                     ´É®ÉbÂ.MÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ  iÉÉÒFhÉÉä−hÉÆ BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉÉÊ´É−ÉÉ{ÉcàÉÂ * 
                     BÉEh~ ´ÉBÉDjÉâóVÉÉä cÉÎxiÉ ÉÊ¶É®ÉäØnÂ ¤ÉÉÎºiÉ¶ÉÉävÉxÉàÉÂ **5 1 ** 
                                       (vÉ0 ÉÊx É0 ,¶Éi É{ÉÖ−{ÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     ´É®ÉbÂ.MÉÆ BÉE]ÖBÉEÆ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ iÉÉÒFhÉÉä−hÉÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ãÉPÉÖ * 
                     ÉÊ{ÉkÉãÉÆ BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉPxÉÆ Øn¤ÉÉÎºiÉM ÉnVÉxiÉÖÉÊVÉiÉÂ **1 3 3 7 ** 
                     {ÉÉÒxÉºÉÉâóÉÊSÉBÉEBÉEhbÂ ´ÉÉàÉ´ÉÉiÉ nÖxÉÉÇàÉ¶ÉÖµÉEØiÉÂ * 
                                        (BÉEè0 ÉÊx É0 , +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     ´ÉÉÎÿxÉàÉÉxtÉÉÉÊxÉãÉc®àÉÉvªÉÉxÉÉFÉä{ ÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉàÉÂ * 
                     ´ÉÉxiªÉÖiBÉDãÉä¶É|É¶ÉàÉxÉÆºÉÆOÉÉÉÊcn¶ ÉxÉÉÉÌiÉØiÉÂ ** 
                     i´ÉÉSÉÆiÉèãÉÆ®VÉ& »ÉÉÉÊ´ÉiÉÉäªÉäÉÊFÉ {iÉÆÉÊxÉàÉVVÉÉÊiÉ * 
                                         (+ÉÉ0 º ÉÆ0 ) 
                                                            (+ÉÉjÉäªÉ º ÉÆÉÊciÉÉ) 
 
                     =BÉDiÉÉ nÉâóÉÊºÉiÉÉ º´ÉÉuÉÒ ÉÊiÉBÉ DiÉÉSÉÉÊxÉãÉÉÊ{ÉkÉØiÉÂ * 
                     ºÉÖ®ÉÊ£É& ¶ÉÖµÉEãÉÉ¤ÉãªÉÉ àÉÖJÉ¶ÉÉ ä−ÉiÉß−ÉÉ{ÉcÉ **6 7 ** 
                                      (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊx É0 ,  BÉE{ÉÇÚ®ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
  CDXXXIII                              MÉ É äPÉ ßiÉ  
 
                      ºÉÉÌ{É´ÉÉÇiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉ|É¶ÉàÉxÉÉxÉÉàÉÂ **4 0 **  
                               (SÉ0 º ÉÚ0  2 5 ) 
 
                     ÉÊ´É{ÉÉBÉEä àÉvÉÖ®Æ ¶ÉÉÒiÉÆ ´ÉÉiÉÉÊ{É kÉÉÊ´É−ÉÉ{ÉcàÉÂ * 
                     SÉFÉÖ−ªÉàÉM¹ÉÆ ¤ÉãªÉÆ SÉ MÉBªÉÆ ºÉÉ Ì{ÉMÉÇÖhÉÉäkÉ®àÉÂÂ **9 7 ** 
                                   (º ÉÚ0 º ÉÚ0  4 5 ) 
 
                     ¶ÉºiÉÆ vÉÉÒºàÉßÉÊiÉàÉävÉÉÉÎMxÉ¤ÉãÉÉªÉÖ& ¶ÉÖµÉESÉFÉÖ−ÉÉàÉÂ * 
                     ¤ÉÉãÉ´Éßr|ÉVÉÉBÉEÉÉÎxiÉºÉÉèBÉÖEàÉÉª ÉÇÉÎºlÉ®ÉÉÌlÉxÉÉàÉÂ **1 3 5 ** 
                     FÉiÉFÉÉÒhÉ{É®ÉÒºÉ{ÉÇ¶ÉºjÉÉÉÎMxÉMãÉ ÉÊ{ÉiÉÉiàÉxÉÉàÉÂ * 
                     ÉÊ´É{ÉÉBÉEä àÉvÉÖ®Æ ¶ÉÉÒiÉÆ ´ÉÉiÉÉÊ{É kÉÉÊ´É−ÉÉ{ÉcàÉÂ **1 3 6 ** 
                     SÉFÉÖ−ªÉÆ ¤ÉãªÉàÉOÉªÉÆ\SÉ MÉBªÉÆ º ÉÉÌ{ÉMÉÇÖhÉÉäkÉ®àÉÂ * 
                                    (vÉ0 ÉÊx É0 , º ÉÖ´Éh ÉÉÇÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     MÉBªÉÆ ºÉÉÌ{É& º´ÉÉnÖ {ÉÉBÉEä ´ÉÉi ÉÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcàÉÂ * 
                     ´Éß−ªÉä−´ÉOªÉÆ {É®Æ ¤ÉãªÉÆ PÉßiÉgÉä −~Æ ÉÊjÉnÉä−ÉÉÊVÉiÉÂ **2 7 1 ** 
                                       (BÉEè0 ÉÊx É0 , P ÉßiÉ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     vÉÉÒBÉEÉÉÎxiÉºàÉßÉÊiÉnÉªÉBÉEÆ ¤ÉãÉBÉ E®Æ àÉävÉÉ|ÉnÆ {ÉÖÉÎ−]BÉßEiÉÂ * 
                     ´ÉÉiÉ¶ãÉä−àÉc®Æ gÉàÉÉä{É¶ÉàÉxÉÆ ÉÊ{ÉkÉ É{ÉcÆ ØtÉàÉÂ ** 
                     ´ÉÿxÉä´ÉÇßÉÊrBÉE®Æ ÉÊ´É{ÉÉBÉEàÉvÉÖ®Æ ´ Éß−ªÉÆ ´É{ÉÖ& ºlÉèªªÉÇnÆ * 
                     MÉBªÉÆ cBªÉiÉàÉÆ PÉßiÉÆ ¤ÉcÖMÉÖhÉÆ £ÉÉ äMªÉÆ £É´ÉänÂÂ£ÉÉMªÉiÉ& **7 7 ** 
                                       (®É0 ÉÊx É0 , FÉ ÉÒ®ÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     MÉBªÉÆ PÉßiÉÆ ÉÊ´É¶Éä−ÉähÉ SÉFÉÖ−ªÉ Æ ´Éß−ªÉàÉÉÎMxÉBÉßEiÉ * 
                     º´ÉÉnÖ{ÉÉBÉEBÉE®Æ ¶ÉÉÒiÉÆ ´ÉÉiÉÉÊ{É kÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcàÉÂ **4 ** 
                     àÉävÉÉãÉÉ´ÉhªÉBÉEÉxiªÉÉäVÉºiÉäºiÉVÉ Éä´ÉßÉÊrBÉE®Æ {É®àÉÂ * 
                     +ÉãÉFàÉÉÒ{ÉÉ{É®FÉÉäPxÉÆ ´ÉªÉºÉ& ºl ÉÉ{ÉBÉEÆ MÉÖâó **5 ** 
                     ¤ÉãªÉÆ {ÉÉÊ´ÉjÉàÉÉªÉÖ−ªÉÆ ºÉÖàÉbÂÂ.MÉãªÉÆ ®ºÉÉªÉxÉàÉÂ * 
                     ºÉÖMÉxvÉÆ ®ÉäSÉxÉÆ SÉÉâó ºÉ´ÉÉÇVªÉä −ÉÖ MÉÖhÉÉÉÊvÉBÉEàÉÂ **6 ** 
                                                                  (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊx É0 , PÉßiÉ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
                                                                 
 
 MÉÖb  
 
               |É£ÉÚiÉÉÊµÉEÉÊàÉàÉVVÉÉºÉß ³~àÉänÉä àÉÉÆºÉBÉE®Éä MÉÖb& ** 237 ** 
                                  (SÉ0 ºÉÚ0 27) 
 
               MÉÖb& ºÉFÉÉ®àÉvÉÖ®Éä xÉÉÉÊiÉ¶ÉÉÒiÉ& ÉÎºxÉ MvÉÉä àÉÚjÉ®BÉDiÉ¶ÉÉävÉxÉÉä *  
               xÉÉÉÊiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉ ÉÊVÉuÉiÉPxÉÉä àÉän& BÉßEÉÊàÉBÉ E{ÉEBÉE®Éä ¤ÉãªÉÉä ´Éß−ªÉ`SÉ ** 
               ÉÊ{ÉkÉPxÉÉä àÉvÉÖ®& ¶ÉÖrÉä ´ÉÉiÉPxÉÉä%ºÉßB ÉEÂ|ÉºÉÉnxÉ& * 
               ºÉ{ÉÖ®ÉhÉÉä%ÉÊvÉBÉEMÉÖhÉÉä MÉÖb& {ÉlªÉiÉàÉ & ºàÉßiÉ& ** 161 ** 
                                  (ºÉÖ0 ºÉÚ0 45)  CDXXXIV   
               |É£ÉÚiÉBÉßEÉÊàÉàÉVVÉÉºÉß ³~àÉänÉäàÉÉÆºÉBÉE{ÉEÉä%{É®& * 
               ØtÉ {ÉÖ®ÉhÉ& {ÉlªÉ¶SÉ xÉ´É& ¶ãÉä−àÉÉÉÎM xÉºÉÉnBÉßEiÉÂ ** 48 ** 
                                   (+É0 Ø0 5) 
 
               MÉÖb& ºªÉÉÉÊnFÉÖ®ºÉÉ`SÉ àÉvÉÖ®Éä ®ºÉ{ÉÉ BÉEVÉ& 
               MÉÖb& ºÉàÉvÉÖ®& FÉÉ®Éä MÉÖâó−hÉ& BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉ iÉxÉÖiÉÂ  
               +ÉÉÊciÉ& ÉÊ{ÉkÉ®BÉDiÉä SÉ VÉÉÒhÉÇ¶SÉè´É ®ºÉ ÉªÉxÉ& * 
                                     (vÉ0 ÉÊxÉ0 BÉE® ´ÉÉÒ®ÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
              xÉ´ÉÉä%vÉÉèiÉÉä MÉÖb& º´ÉÉnÖ& ºÉFÉÉ®& ºÉÉ ®BÉEÉä  MÉÖb& * 
              ´ÉÉiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉÉÉÎMxÉBÉßEiÉÂ ÉÎºxÉMvÉÉä àÉÚjÉ®BÉDi ÉÉÊ´É¶ÉÉävÉxÉ& ** 166 ** 
              àÉänÉäàÉÉÆºÉBÉßEÉÊàÉ¶ãÉä−àÉàÉVVÉÉ»É¤ÉãÉ¶ÉÖµÉEBÉ ßEiÉÂ * 
              xÉÉÉÊiÉ¶ãÉä−àÉBÉE®Éä vÉÉèiÉÉä ´ÉÉiÉPxÉÉä%ºÉ ßBÉD|ÉºÉÉnxÉ& ** 167 ** 
              º´ÉÉnÖ{ÉÉBÉE®ºÉ& ÉÎºxÉMvÉ& ¶ÉBÉßExàÉÚjÉÉxÉ ÖãÉÉäàÉxÉ& * 
              VÉÉÒhÉÇ& º´ÉÉnÖ {ÉlªÉØtÉÉä xÉÉÉÊ£É−ªÉxtÉÉÎMxÉ BÉßEããÉvÉÖ& ** 168 ** 
              |É{ÉÖ®ÉhÉÉä ´É®ºiÉºªÉÉiºÉ´ÉÇ®ÉäMÉc®Éä ãÉ PÉÖ& * 
              ºÉÆ´ÉiºÉ®ÉäÉÊ−ÉiÉMÉÖb& {ÉÖ®ÉhÉ <ÉÊiÉ BÉEl ªÉiÉä ** 169 ** 
              ´É−ÉÇjÉªÉÉäÉÊ−ÉiÉ& ºÉÉä%ÉÊ{É |É{ÉÖ®ÉhÉ& | ÉBÉEÉÒÉÌiÉiÉ& * 
              +ÉÉÊ®−]ÉtÉä−ÉÖ ºÉ´Éæ−ÉÖ |É{ÉÖ®ÉhÉÆ |ÉªÉÉäV ÉªÉäiÉÂ ** 170 ** 
                                    (BÉEè0 ÉÊxÉ0 +ÉÉä− ÉÉÊvÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
              MÉÖb& ºªÉÉÉÊnFÉÖ®ºÉÉºiÉÖ àÉvÉÖ®Éä ®ºÉ{ÉÉ BÉEVÉ& * 
              ÉÊ¶É¶ÉÖÉÊ|ÉªÉ& ÉÊºÉiÉÉÉÊn& ºªÉÉn°ôhÉÉä ®ºÉV É ºàÉßiÉ& ** 100 ** 
 
 
              ÉÊ{ÉkÉPxÉ& {É´ÉxÉÉÉÌiÉÉÊVÉpÖÉÊSÉBÉE®Éä ØtÉ fò nÉä−ÉÉ{Éc&  
              ºÉÆªÉÉäMÉäxÉ ÉÊ´É¶Éä−ÉiÉÉä V´É®c®& ºÉxiÉÉ{ É¶ÉÉÉÎxiÉ|Én& * 
              ÉÊ´ÉhàÉÚjÉÉàÉªÉ¶ÉÉävÉxÉÉä%ÉÎMxÉVÉxÉxÉ& {ÉÉhb Ö|ÉàÉäcÉxiÉBÉE&  
              ÉÎºxÉMvÉ& º´ÉÉnÖiÉ®Éä ãÉPÉÖ& gÉàÉc®& {ÉlªÉ&  {ÉÖ®ÉhÉÉä  MÉÖb& ** 10 ** 
                            (®É0 ÉÊxÉ0, {ÉÉxÉÉÒªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
              
 MÉÖbÉä ´Éß−ªÉÉä MÉÖ°ô& ÉÎºxÉMvÉÉä ´ÉÉiÉPxÉÉä àÉÚjÉ¶ÉÉävÉxÉ&  
              xÉÉÉÊiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉc®Éä àÉän& BÉE{ÉEÉÊµÉEÉÊàÉ¤ÉãÉ|Én&  ** 25 ** 
              MÉÖbÉä VÉÉÒhÉÉæ ãÉPÉÖ& {ÉlªÉÉä%xÉÉÊ£É−ªÉxtÉÉ ÎMxÉ{ÉÖÉÎ−]BÉßEiÉÂ * 
              ÉÊ{ÉkÉPxÉÉä àÉvÉÖ®Éä ´Éß−ªÉÉä ´ÉÉiÉPxÉÉä%ºÉ ßBÉD|ÉºÉÉnxÉ& ** 26 ** 
              MÉÖbÉä xÉ´É& BÉE{ÉE`´ÉÉºÉBÉEÉºÉÉÊµÉEÉÊàÉBÉE®Éä% ÉÎMxÉBÉßEiÉÂ ** 27 ** 
                               (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊxÉ0, <FÉÖ´ ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
 
 
                                       VÉãÉàÉÂ 
  CDXXXV                      ºÉÉvÉÉ®hÉÆ VÉãÉÆ âóSªÉÆ nÉÒ{ÉxÉÆ {É ÉSÉxÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ * 
                     gÉàÉiÉß−hÉÉ{ÉcÆ ´ÉÉiÉBÉE{ÉEàÉänÉävxÉ{ ÉÖÉÎ−]nàÉÂ **2 7 5 ** 
                     {ÉÉxÉÉÒªÉÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ÉÊcàÉÆ SÉ âóÉÊSÉnÆ i Éß−hÉÉºªÉ¶ÉÉä−ÉÉ{ÉcàÉÂ * 
                     àÉÉäc§ÉÉÉÎxiÉ{ÉÉBÉE®ÉäÉÊiÉ BÉÖEâóiÉä £ÉÖBÉDiÉxxÉ{ÉÉÊkÉ {ÉÆ®ÉàÉÂ ** 
                     ÉÊxÉpÉãÉºªÉÉÊxÉ®ÉºÉxÉÆ ÉÊ´É−Éc®Æ §É ÉxiÉÉiÉÇºÉÆiÉ{ÉÇhÉàÉÂ * 
                      xÉßhÉÉÆ vÉÉÒ¤ÉãÉ´ÉÉÒªÉÇ¤ÉÖÉÊrVÉxÉxÉÆ xÉ−]ÉbÂ.MÉ {ÉÖÉÎ−]|ÉnàÉÂ **2 7 6 ** 
                       (vÉ0 ÉÊx É0 ,º ÉÖ´ÉhÉÉÇÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ) 
 
                      {ÉÉxÉÉÒªÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ âóSªÉÆ ¶ÉÖSªÉB ªÉBÉDiÉ®ºÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ **3 ** 
                      +ÉºªÉÉÎxn ÉÊ´É¶ÉnÆ ØtÉÆ àÉ°ôFÉÆ ÉÊ´ÉÉÊx ÉªÉSUÉÊiÉ * 
                      nÉcÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ»ÉàÉÚSUÉæ−àÉàÉnSUÉÌnÉÊ´É− ÉgÉàÉÉxÉÂ **4 ** 
                      àÉnÉiªÉªÉiÉß−ÉÉMãÉÉÉÊxÉÉÊ´ÉnMvÉi ÉàÉBÉE§ÉàÉÉxÉÂ * 
                                           (BÉEè0 ÉÊx É 0 ,p´É´ÉMÉÇ) 
 
                      ºÉÉvÉÉ®hÉÆ VÉãÉÆ âóSªÉÆ nÉÒ{ÉxÉÆ { ÉÉSÉxÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ * 
                      gÉàÉiÉß−hÉÉ{ÉcÆ ´ÉÉiÉBÉE{ÉEàÉänÉäPxÉ {ÉÖÉÎ−]nàÉÂ **4 5 ** 
                                      (®É0 ÉÊx É0 ,{ÉÉx ÉÉÒªÉÉÉÊn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      {ÉÉxÉÉÒªÉÆ gÉàÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉÆ BÉDãÉàÉc®Æ àÉÚS UÉÇÉÊ{É{ÉÉºÉÉ{ÉcÆ- 
                      iÉxpÉSUÉÌnÉÊ´É¤ÉxvÉØnÂ ¤ÉãÉBÉE® Æ ÉÊxÉpÉc®Æ iÉ{ÉÇhÉàÉÂ * 
                      ØtÉÆ MÉÖ{iÉ®ºÉÆ cªÉVÉÉÒhÉÇ¶ÉàÉBÉEÆ ÉÊx ÉiªÉÆ ÉÊciÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ- 
                      ãÉP´ÉSUÆ ®ºÉBÉEÉ®hÉÆ ÉÊxÉMÉÉÊniÉÆ {ÉÉÒªÉÚ−É´ÉVVÉÉÒ´ÉxÉàÉÂ **2 ** 
                                        (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊx É 0 ,´ÉÉÉÊ®´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                                          
                                    BÉE{ÉÇÚ® (ÉÊx ÉªÉÉ Çº É) 
 
                      ºÉÉÊiÉBÉDiÉ& ºÉÖ®ÉÊ£É& ¶ÉÉÒiÉ& BÉ E{ÉÇÚ®Éä ãÉPÉÖ ãÉäJÉxÉ& **2 0 3 ** 
                      iÉß−hÉÉªÉÉÆ àÉÖJÉ¶ÉÉä−Éä SÉ ´Éè® ºªÉä SÉÉÉÊ{É {ÉÚÉÊVÉiÉ& 
                                                (º É Ö0 º ÉÚ0 4 6 ) 
 
                       
BÉE{ÉÚ®Æ BÉE]ÖÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ SÉ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ÉÊ¶ÉÉÊ¶É®Æ ÉÊ´ÉnÖ& * 
                      iÉßhàÉänÉäÉÊ´É−ÉnÉä−ÉPxÉÆ SÉFÉÖ−ªÉ Æ àÉnBÉEÉ®BÉEàÉÂ **3 0 ** 
                                                (vÉ 0 ÉÊx É0 , SÉx nx ÉÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      BÉE{ÉÇÚ®Éä àÉvÉÖ®ÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉ& ºÉÖ®É Ê£É& ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉä ãÉPÉÖ& **1 2 7 8 **  
                      SÉFÉÖ−ªÉÉä ãÉäJÉxÉÉä ´Éß−ªÉ& BÉ E{ÉEàÉänÉäÉÊ´É−ÉÉ{Éc& * 
                      nÉciÉß−hÉÉºªÉ´Éè®ºªÉàÉãÉnÉèMÉÇxv ªÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉ& **1 2 7 9 ** 
                                                  ( BÉEè0 ÉÊx É0 ,+ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      BÉE{ÉÇÚ®Éä xÉÚiÉxÉÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉ& ÉÎºxÉ MvÉ¶SÉÉä−hÉÉäs »ÉnÉcn& * 
                      ÉÊSÉ®ºlÉÉä nÉcnÉä−ÉPxÉ& ºÉ vÉÉèi É& ¶ÉÖ£ÉBÉßEi{É®& **6 3 ** 
                                               (®É0 ÉÊx É0 ,SÉx nx ÉÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
  CDXXXVI                        BÉE{ÉÇÚ®& ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÉä ´Éß−ªÉgSÉFÉÖ −ªÉÉä ãÉäJÉxÉÉä ãÉPÉÖ& * 
                      ºÉÖ®ÉÊ£ÉàÉÇvÉÖ®ÉÎºiÉBÉDiÉ& BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{É kÉÉÊ´É−ÉÉ{Éc& **2 ** 
                      nÉciÉß−hÉÉ%ºªÉ´Éè®ºªÉàÉänÉänÉèM ÉÇxvªÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉ& * 
                                             (£ÉÉ0 | É0 ÉÊx É0 , BÉE{ÉÇÚ®ÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
 
                                     
                                  ãÉ´ÉÆMÉ ({ÉÖ−{É BÉEÉ ÊãÉBÉEÉ) 
 
                      vÉÉªÉÉÇhªÉÉºªÉäxÉ ´Éè¶ÉPÉâóÉÊFÉºÉ ÉèMÉxvªÉÉÊàÉÉÎSUiÉÉ **7 6 ** 
                      VÉÉiÉÉÒBÉE]ÚBÉEÉ{ÉÚMÉÉxÉÉÆ ãÉ´ÉÆb Â.MÉºªÉ {ÉEãÉÉÉÊxÉ SÉ * 
                                             (SÉ0 º É Ú0  5 ) 
 
                     VÉÉiÉÉÒBÉEÉä¶ÉÉäslÉÂ BÉE{ÉÇÚ®Æ VÉÉiÉÉ ÒBÉE]ÖBÉEªÉÉä {ÉEãÉàÉÂ * 
                     BÉEBÉDBÉEÉäãÉBÉEÆ ãÉ´ÉÆbÂ.MÉ SÉ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ BÉE]Ö BÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcàÉÂ **2 0 2 ** 
                     ãÉPÉÖ iÉß−hÉÉ{ÉcÆ ´ÉµÉEBÉDãÉännÉèM ÉÇxvªÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉàÉÂ * 
                                             (º ÉÚ0 º É Ö0  4 6 ) 
 
                     ãÉ´ÉbÂMÉ BÉÖEºÉÖàÉÆ ØtÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ ÉÊ{Ék ÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉàÉÂ * 
                    SÉÉFÉÖ−ªÉÆ ÉÊ´É−ÉØiÉ ´Éß−ªÉÆ àÉÉbÂÂ.MÉãªÉÆ àÉÚvÉÇ®ÉäMÉciÉÂ **4 0 **  
                                     (vÉ0 ÉÊx É0 , SÉx n x ÉÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      ãÉ´ÉbÂ.MÉÆ BÉE]ÖBÉEÆ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ âóFÉÆ ØtÉÆ ÉÊcàÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ * 
                      SÉFÉÖ−ªÉÆ {ÉÉSÉxÉÆ cÉÎxiÉ ¶ÉÚãÉÉx ÉÉcFÉiÉFÉªÉÉxÉÂ **1 3 3 4 ** 
                      BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ»ÉiÉß]ÂBÉEÉºÉg´ÉÉºÉÉPàÉ ÉÉÊ´É−É{ÉÉÒxÉºÉÉxÉÂ * 
                                       (BÉEè0 ÉÊx É0 , + ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      ãÉ´ÉbÂ.MÉÆ ºÉÉä−hBÉEÆ iÉÉÒFhÉÆ ÉÊ´É {ÉÉBÉEä àÉvÉÖ®Æ ÉÊcàÉàÉÂ * 
                      ´ÉÉiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉàÉPxÉÆ FÉªÉBÉEÉºÉ É»ÉnÉä−ÉxÉÖiÉÂ **8 4 ** 
                                       (®É0 ÉÊx É0 ,SÉx nx ÉÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      ãÉ´ÉbÂÂ.MÉÆ BÉE]ÖBÉEÆ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ xÉäjÉÉÊciÉÆ ÉÊcàÉàÉÂ **5 8 ** 
                      nÉÒ{ÉxÉÆ {ÉÉSÉxÉÆ âóSªÉÆ BÉE{ÉEÉÊ{Ék ÉÉ»ÉxÉÉ¶ÉBÉßEiÉÂ * 
                      iÉß−hÉÉÆ UÉÌn iÉlÉÉ%%vàÉÉxÉÆ ¶ÉÚã ÉàÉÉ¶ÉÖ ÉÊ´ÉxÉÉ¶ÉªÉäiÉÂ * 
                      BÉEÉºÉÆ g´ÉÉºÉ\SÉ ÉÊcBÉDBÉEÉ\SÉ FÉ ªÉÆ FÉ{ÉªÉÉÊiÉ wÉÖ´ÉàÉÂ **5 9 ** 
                                       (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊx É0 , BÉE{ÉÇÚ®ÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                                                               
                        àÉvÉÖ 
 
                      ´ÉÉiÉãÉÆ MÉÖâó ¶ÉÉÒiÉÆ SÉ ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcàÉÂ * 
                      ºÉxvÉÉiÉß SUänxÉÆ °ôFÉÆ BÉE−ÉÉªÉàÉ vÉÖ®Æ àÉvÉÖ **2 4 5 ** 
                                              (SÉ0 º ÉÚ0  2 7 ) 
 
                      àÉvÉÖ iÉÖ àÉvÉÖ®Æ BÉE−ÉÉªÉÉxÉÖ®ºÉÆ °ôFÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉàÉÉÎMxÉnÉÒ{ÉxÉÆ ´ÉhªÉÈ º´ÉªÉÈ  CDXXXVII                        ãÉPÉÖ ºÉÖBÉÖEàÉÉ®Æ ãÉäJÉxÉÆ ØtÉÆ ´ÉÉ VÉÉÒBÉE®hÉÆ ºÉxvÉÉxÉÆ ¶ÉÉävÉxÉÆ ®Éä{ÉhÉÆ (ºÉÆOÉÉÉÊc) 
                      SÉFÉÖ−ªÉÆ |ÉºÉÉnxÉÆ ºÉÚFàÉàÉÉMÉÉÇxÉ ÖºÉÉÉÊ® 
                      ÉÊ{ÉkÉ¶ãÉä−àÉàÉänÉäàÉäcÉÊcBÉDBÉEÉg´ÉÉº ÉBÉEÉºÉÉÉÊiÉºÉÉ®SUÉÌniÉß−hÉÉ 
                      BÉßEÉÊàÉÉÊ´É−É|É¶ÉàÉxÉÆ …ÉÉÊn ÉÊjÉnÉ ä−É|É¶ÉàÉxÉÆ SÉ iÉkÉÖ ãÉPÉÖi´ÉÉiÉÂ  
                      BÉE{ÉEPxÉÆ {ÉèÉÎSUãªÉÉxÉÂàÉÉvÉÖªÉÉÇiÉÂ BÉE−ÉÉªÉ£ÉÉ´ÉÉSSÉ ´ÉÉiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉPxÉàÉÂ **1 3 2 ** 
                                             (º ÉÖ0 º É Ú0  4 5 ) 
 
                      BÉE−ÉÉªÉxÉÖ®ºÉÆ °ôFÉÆ ¶ÉÉÒiÉãÉÆ àÉv ÉÖ®Æ àÉvÉÖ * 
                      nÉÒ{ÉxÉÆ ãÉäJÉxÉÆ ¤ÉãªÉÆ µÉhÉ®Éä{É hÉàÉÖkÉàÉàÉÂ **2 1 7 ** 
                      ºÉxvÉÉxÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ SÉFÉÖ−ªÉÆ º´ÉªÉÈ ØtÉÆ ÉÊjÉnÉä−ÉxÉÖiÉÂ * 
                      UÉÌnÉÊcBÉDBÉEÉÉÊ´É−Ég´ÉÉºÉBÉEÉºÉ¶É Éä−ÉÉÉÊiÉºÉÉ®ÉÊVÉiÉÂ **2 1 8 ** 
                      ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉc®Æ OÉÉÉÊc BÉßEÉÊàÉiÉßhÉàÉ Éäcci{É®àÉÂ * 
                                       (vÉ0 ÉÊx É0  º ÉÖ´ ÉhÉÉÌn ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     àÉvÉÖ º´ÉÉnÖ ÉÊcàÉÆ °ôFÉÆ BÉE−ÉÉªÉÉxÉÖ ®ºÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ * 
                     nÉÒ{ÉxÉÆ OÉÉÉÊc SÉFÉÖ−ªÉÆ º´ÉªÉÈ ´É hªÉç ÉÊ´ÉãÉä{ÉxÉàÉÂ **1 7 5 ** 
                     ºÉÉèBÉÖEàÉÉªÉÇBÉE®Æ ´Éß−ªÉÆ ØtÉÆ ºjÉ ÉäiÉÉäÉÊ´É¶ÉÉävÉxÉàÉÂ * 
                     ºÉÚFàÉÆ àÉävÉÉBÉE®Æ UäÉÊn µÉhÉ¶ÉÉävÉxÉ ®Éä{ÉhÉàÉÂ **1 7 6 ** 
                     ÉÊ´É¶ÉnÆ ®ÉäSÉxÉÆ …ÉÉÊn |ÉºÉÉnVÉxÉ xÉÆ VÉªÉäiÉÂ * 
                     àÉän&ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉE{ÉEg´ÉÉºÉÉÊcvàÉàÉäc´ÉÉÊàÉFÉ ªÉÉxÉÂ **1 7 7 ** 
                     nÉä−ÉjÉªÉÉÉÊiÉºÉÉ®É»ÉiÉß−hÉÉnÉc ÉÊ´É−ÉBÉßEàÉÉÒxÉÂ * 
                     BÉÖE−~É¶ÉÉæ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉPxÉÆ ªÉÉäMÉ´ ÉÉÉÊc SÉ ´ÉÉiÉãÉàÉÂ **1 7 8 ** 
                     ´ÉÉiÉãÉÆ ´ÉÉiÉBÉEÉä{Éä%ÉÊ{É ´É−ÉÉÇºÉ Ö àÉvÉÖ ¶ÉºªÉiÉä * 
                                        (BÉEè0 ÉÊx É0 , +ÉÉä−ÉÉÊvÉ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     xÉ´ÉÆ àÉvÉÖ £É´ÉäiÉÂ ºlÉÉèãªÉÆ xÉÉÉÊiÉ ¶ãÉä−àÉBÉE®Æ {É®àÉÂ * 
                     näcºlÉÉèãªÉÉ{ÉcÆ OÉÉÉÊc {ÉÖ®ÉhÉÆ àÉv ÉÖ ãÉäJÉxÉàÉÂ **1 3 1 ** 
                                        (®É0 ÉÊx É0 , { ÉÉx ÉÉÒªÉÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     àÉvÉÖ ¶ÉÉÒiÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ º´ÉÉnÖ °ôFÉÆ OÉÉÉÊ c ÉÊ´ÉãÉäJÉxÉàÉÂ * 
                     SÉFÉÖ−ªÉÆ nÉÒ{ÉxÉÆ º´ÉªÉÈ  µÉhÉ¶ÉÉ ävÉxÉ®Éä{ÉhÉàÉÂ **2 ** 
                     ºÉÉèBÉÖEàÉÉªÉÇBÉE®Æ ºÉÚFàÉÆ {É®Æ ºjÉÉ äiÉÉäÉÊ´É¶ÉÉävÉxÉàÉÂ * 
                     BÉE−ÉÉªÉÉxÉÖ®ºÉÆ …ÉÉÊn |ÉºÉÉnVÉ xÉBÉEÆ {É®àÉÂ **3 ** 
                     ´ÉhªÉÇ àÉävÉÉBÉE®Æ ´Éß−ªÉÆ ÉÊ´É¶ÉnÆ ® ÉäSÉxÉÆ c®äiÉÂ * 
                     BÉÖE−~É¶ÉÇ& BÉEÉºÉÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ»ÉBÉE{ÉEàÉäcB ÉDãÉàÉÉÊµÉEàÉÉÒxÉÂ **4 ** 
                     àÉänºiÉß−hÉÉ´ÉÉÊàÉ¶´ÉÉºÉÉÊcBÉDBÉEÉ% iÉÉÒºÉÉ®ÉÊ´ÉbÂOÉcÉxÉÂ * 
                     nÉc FÉiÉFÉªÉÉÆºiÉiÉÖ ªÉÉäMÉ´ÉÉÿªÉ ã{É´ÉÉiÉãÉàÉÂ **5 ** 
                                       (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊx É0 , àÉvÉÖ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                     ¶ÉÉÒiÉÆBÉE−ÉÉªÉÆàÉvÉÖ®Æ ãÉPÉÖºªÉiºÉ ÆnÉÒ{ÉxÉÆãÉäcxÉàÉä´É¶ÉºiÉàÉÂ * 
                     ºÉÆ¶ÉÉävÉxÉÆ´ÉÉµÉhÉ¶ÉÉävÉxÉ\SÉºÉÆ® Éä{ÉhÉÆ ØtÉÆiÉàÉ\SÉ¤ÉãªÉàÉÂ ** 
                     ÉÊjÉnÉä−ÉxÉÉ¶ÉÆBÉÖEâóiÉäSÉ{ÉÖÉÐ−]B ÉEÉºÉFÉªÉä´ÉÉFÉiÉVÉäSÉUtÉÉÇàÉÂ * 
                     ÉÊcBÉDBÉEÉ§ÉàÉä¶ÉÉä−ÉhÉ{ÉÉÒxÉºÉÉxÉÉ Æ®BÉDiÉÆ|ÉàÉäcä¶´ÉºÉxÉäÉÊiÉºÉÉ®ä * 
                     ®BÉDiÉÉÉÊiÉºÉÉ®äSÉºÉ®®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉäiÉ ßhàÉÉäcØi{ÉÉ¶´ÉÇMÉnäsÉÊ{É¶ÉºiÉ& *  CDXXXVIII                       xÉäjÉÉàÉªÉä´ÉÉOÉchÉÉÒMÉnä´ÉÉÉÊ´É−É|É ¶ÉºiÉÆàÉvÉÖÿªÉã{É´ÉÉiÉãÉàÉÂ ** 
                                        (¶É É 0É ÊxÉ 0,  àÉ v É Ö´É MÉ Ç. ) 
 
 
 
                                           {ÉÚÉÊiÉcÉ(à Éäx lÉÉ iÉèãÉàÉÂ ) 
 
                     {ÉÖÉÊnxÉºiÉÖMÉÖâó& º´ÉÉnÚâóSªÉÉäØtÉ&  ºÉÖJÉÉ´Éc& 
                     àÉãÉàÉÚjÉºiÉà£ÉBÉE®& BÉE{ÉEBÉEÉºÉàÉnÉ {Éc& ** 
                     +ÉÉÎMxÉàÉÉÆtÉÉÊ´ÉºÉÚÉÊSÉPxÉ& ºÉÆOÉchªÉ ÉÊiÉºÉÉ®cÉ * 
                     VÉÉÒhÉÇV´É®Æ BÉÖEàÉÉÒ¶SÉè´ÉxÉÉªÉäÉÊnÉÊi ÉBÉEÉÒÉÌiÉiÉàÉÂ ** 
                                                      (ÉÊx É0  ®0 ) 
 
                      +É®ÉäSÉ´Éè®ºªÉBÉßEnÂ ´ÉÉÊàÉÉÊµÉEÉÊàÉ| É£É\VÉxÉ¶ãÉä−àÉMÉn|É£É\VÉxÉ& * 
                      °ôFÉºiÉªÉÉä−hÉ& ºÉÖ®ÉÊ£É ®VÉ& | Én {ÉÉänÉÒxÉBÉE& BÉEãBÉEÉÊ´ÉvÉÉè|É¶ÉºªÉiÉä ** 
                                                     (ÉÊº É0 £Éä0 àÉ0 ) 
 
                      {ÉÚÉÊiÉcÉ BÉE]Öâó−hÉgSÉ ®ÉäSÉxÉÉä nÉÒ{ ÉxÉÉä ãÉPÉÖ& * 
                      cÉÎxiÉ ´ÉÉiÉBÉE{ÉEÉvàÉÉxÉ¶ÉÚãÉSUÉÌ nBÉßEàÉÉÒºiÉlÉÉ **º ´É0 ** 
                                       (p0 MÉÖ0 ÉÊ´É0  BÉ ßEiÉ |ÉÉä0 ÉÊ|É0 µÉiÉ ¶ÉàÉÉÇ) 
 
                      ®ÉäSÉxÉÉÒ ´ÉÉÎÿxÉVÉxÉxÉÉÒ ´ÉBÉDjÉV ÉÉbªÉÉÊxÉ−ÉÚnxÉÉÒ * 
                      BÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉc®ÉÒ ¤ÉãªÉÉ UtÉÇ®ÉäSÉBÉ E´ÉÉÉÊ®hÉÉÒ ** 
                                        (+ÉÉ0 ÉÊ´É0 ) 
 
                                          
 
                                                                  ¶ÉBÉEÇ®É 
  
                      ´Éß−ªÉÉ FÉÉÒhÉFÉiÉÉÊciÉÉ ºÉºxÉäc ÉMÉÖb¶ÉBÉEÇ®É * 
                      iÉß−hÉÉºÉßBÉEÂÉÊ{ÉkÉnÉcä−ÉÖ |É¶É ºiÉÉ& ºÉ´ÉÇ¶ÉBÉEÇ®É& **2 4 1 ** 
                                           (SÉ0 º ÉÚ0  2 7 ) 
 
                      ¶ÉBÉEÇ®É ¶ÉÉÒiÉ´ÉÉÒªÉÉÇ iÉÖ ºÉ´ÉÇ nÉcÉÊ´ÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉÉÒ * 
                      ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉ|É¶ÉàÉxÉÉÒ UÉÌnàÉÚSUÉÇiÉ ß−ÉÉ{ÉcÉ **1 0 2 ** 
                                       (vÉ0 ÉÊx É0 , ¶É iÉ{ÉÖ−{ÉÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      ¶ÉBÉEÇ®É ´ÉÉiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉÉºÉßbÂ.àÉßSUÉÇSUÉÌnÉÊ´É−ÉÉ{ÉcÉ * 
                                        p0 º ÉÆ0  (SÉµÉ E{ÉÉÉÊhÉnkÉBÉßEiÉÂ) 
 
                      ¶ÉBÉEÇ®É¶ÉÉÒiÉ´ÉÉÒªªÉÉÇSÉÉÊ´É{ÉÉB ÉEäàÉvÉÖ®ÉºÉ®É * 
                      nÉciÉß]UÉÌqàÉÚSUÉÇ»ÉBÉßEÉÊàÉBÉEÉä{ÉÉÊ´Éx ÉÉÉÊ¶ÉxÉÉÒ ** 
                                        (¶ÉÉ0 ÉÊx É0 , <FÉÖ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      ÉÊºÉiÉÉ ºÉÖàÉvÉÖ®É âóSªÉÉ ´ÉÉiÉÉ Ê{ÉkÉÉ»ÉnÉcØiÉÂ *  CDXXXIX                        àÉÚSUÉÇSUÉÌnV´É®ÉxcÉÎxiÉ ºÉÖ¶ÉÉÒiÉÉ  ¶ÉÖµÉEBÉEÉÉÊ®hÉÉÒ **3 0 ** 
                                       (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊx É0 , <FÉÖ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
 
 
                                 º É−ÉÇ{É (iÉèãÉàÉÂ) 
 
                      BÉE]Ú−hÉÆ ºÉÉ−ÉÇ{ÉÆ iÉèãÉÆ ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{É kÉ|ÉnÚ−ÉhÉàÉÂ * 
                      BÉE{ÉE¶ÉÖµÉEÉÉÊxÉãÉc®Æ BÉEhbÚBÉEÉä~ÉÊ´Éx ÉÉ¶ÉxÉàÉÂ **2 9 0 ** 
                                           (SÉ0 º ÉÚ0  2 7 ) 
 
                      BÉßEÉÊàÉPxÉÆ ºÉÉ−ÉÇ{ÉÆ iÉèãÉÆ BÉEhbÚBÉ ÖE−~É{ÉcÆ ãÉPÉÖ * 
                      BÉE{ÉEàÉänÉäÉÊxÉãÉc®Æ ãÉäJÉxÉÆ BÉE]Ö n ÉÒ{ÉxÉàÉÂ **1 1 7 ** 
                                           (º ÉÖ0 º ÉÖ0  4 5 ) 
 
                      ºÉ−ÉÇ{ÉiÉèãÉÆ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ BÉE]ÖBÉEÉä−h ÉÆ ´ÉÉiÉBÉE{ÉEÉÊ´ÉBÉEÉ®PxÉàÉÂ * 
                 ÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ»ÉnÉä−ÉnÆ ÉÊµÉEÉÊàÉBÉÖE−~PxÉÆ ÉÊiÉãÉ VÉ´ÉSSÉ SÉFÉÖ−ªÉàÉÂ **1 1 0 ** 
                                       (®É0 ÉÊx É0 , FÉ ÉÒ®ÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
nÉÒ{ÉxÉÆ ºÉÉ−ÉÇ{ÉÆ iÉèãÉÆ BÉE]Ö{ÉÉBÉE®ºÉÆ ãÉPÉÖ * 
ãÉäJÉxÉÆ º{É¶ÉÇ´ÉÉÒªªÉÉæ−hÉÆ iÉÉÒFhÉÆ ÉÊ{ÉkÉÉ»ÉnÚ−ÉBÉEàÉÂ **1 3 ** 
BÉE{ÉEàÉänÉä%ÉÊxÉãÉÉ¶ÉÉæPxÉÆ ÉÊ¶É®& BÉEhÉÉÇàÉªÉÉ{ÉcàÉÂ * 
BÉEhbÚBÉÖE−~BÉßEÉÊàÉÉÎ¶´ÉjÉBÉEÉä~nÖ−]ÉÊµÉEÉÊàÉ|ÉhÉÖiÉÂ **1 4 ** 
                                           (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊx É0 , iÉèãÉ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
 
                                         ÉÊiÉãÉ(iÉèãÉ àÉÂ) 
 
BÉE−ÉÉªÉÉxÉÖ®ºÉÆ º´ÉÉnÖ ºÉÚFàÉàÉÖ−hÉÆ  BªÉ´ÉÉÉÊªÉ SÉ * 
ÉÊ{ÉkÉãÉÆ ¤ÉrÉÊ´ÉhàÉÚjÉÆ xÉ SÉ gãÉä−àÉÉÉÊ£É´ÉvÉÇxÉàÉÂ **2 8 6 ** 
´ÉÉiÉPxÉä−ÉÚkÉàÉÆ ¤ÉãªÉÆ i´ÉSªÉÆ àÉävÉÉÉÎMxÉ´ÉvÉÇxÉàÉÂ * 
iÉèãÉÆ ºÉÆªÉÉäMÉºÉÆºBÉEÉ®ÉiÉÂÂºÉ´ÉÇ®ÉäMÉÉ{ÉcÆ àÉiÉàÉÂ **2 8 7 ** 
iÉèãÉ|ÉªÉÉäMÉÉnVÉ®É ÉÊxÉÉÌ´ÉBÉEÉ®É ÉÊVÉiÉgÉàÉÉ& * 
+ÉÉºÉxxÉÉÊiÉ¤ÉãÉÉ& ºÉÆJªÉä nèiªÉÉÉÊvÉ{ÉiÉªÉ& {ÉÖ®É **2 8 8 ** 
                                           (SÉ0 º ÉÚ0  2 7 )  
 
iÉèãÉÆ i´ÉÉMxÉäªÉàÉÖ−hÉÆ iÉÉÒFhÉÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ àÉvÉÖ®ÉÊ´É{ÉÉBÉEÆ 
¤ÉßÆchÉÆ |ÉÉÒhÉxÉÆ BªÉ´ÉÉÉÊªÉ ºÉÚFàÉÆ ÉÊ´É¶ÉnÆ MÉÖ°ô ºÉ®Æ ÉÊ´ÉBÉEÉ ÉÊºÉ 
´Éß−ªÉÆ i´ÉBÉEÂÂ|ÉºÉÉnxÉÆ àÉävÉÉàÉÉnÇ´ÉàÉÉÆºÉºlÉèªÉÇ´ÉhÉÇ¤ÉãÉBÉ E®Æ SÉFÉÖ−ªÉÆ 
¤ÉràÉÚjÉÆ ãÉäJÉxÉÆ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉBÉE−ÉÉªÉÉxÉÖ®ºÉÆ {ÉÉSÉxÉàÉÉÊxÉãÉ ¤ÉãÉÉºÉFÉªÉBÉE®Æ  
ÉÊµÉEÉÊàÉPxÉàÉÉÊ¶ÉiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉVÉxÉxÉÆ ªÉÉäÉÊxÉÉÊ¶É®&BÉEhÉÇ¶ÉÚãÉ|É¶ÉàÉx ÉÆ MÉ£ÉÉÇ¶ÉªÉ¶ÉÉävÉxÉÆ 
SÉ, iÉlÉÉ ÉÊUxxÉÉÊ£ÉxxÉÉÊ´ÉrÉäÉÎi{É−]SªÉÖiÉàÉÉÊlÉiÉFÉiÉÉÊ{ÉÉ ÎSUiÉ£ÉMxÉ- 
º{ÉÖEÉÊ]iÉFÉÉ®ÉÉÎMxÉnMvÉÉÊ´ÉÉÎgãÉ−]nÉÉÊ®iÉÉÉÊ£ÉciÉnÖ£ÉÇMxÉàÉßM ÉBªÉÉãÉÉÊ´Én−]|É£ÉÚÉÊiÉ−ÉÖSÉ {ÉÉÊ®−ÉäBÉEÉ£ªÉ‹É´ÉMÉÉcÉÉÊn− ÉÖ ÉÊiÉãÉiÉèãÉÆ |É¶ÉºªÉiÉä 
**1 1 2 ** 
                                             (º ÉÖ0 º É Ú0  4 5 )   CDXL   
ºxÉÉxÉÉ£ªÉbÂ.MÉÉ´ÉMÉÉcä−ÉÖ ÉÊiÉãÉiÉèãÉÆ ÉÊ´ÉÉÊ¶É−ªÉiÉä * 
iÉuÉÎºiÉ−ÉÖ SÉ {ÉÉxÉä−ÉÖ xÉºªÉBÉEhÉÉÇÉÊFÉ{ÉÚ®hÉä **1 1 4 ** 
+ÉxxÉ{ÉÉxÉÉÊ´ÉvÉÉè ´ÉÉ%ÉÊ{É |ÉªÉÉäVªÉÆ ´ÉÉiÉ¶ÉÉxiÉªÉä * 
ÉÊUxxÉÉÊ£ÉxxÉSªÉÖiÉÉäÉÎi{É−]àÉÉÊlÉFÉiÉ{ÉÉÉÊiÉiÉä **1 1 5 ** 
£ÉMxÉä º{ÉÖEÉÊ]iÉÉÊ´ÉrÉÉÎMxÉnMvÉÉÊ´ÉÉÎ¶ãÉ−]nÉÉÊ®iÉä * 
£ÉªÉÉÉÊ£ÉciÉÉÊxÉ£ÉÇÖMxÉä àÉßMÉBªÉÉãÉÉÉÊn£ÉÉÊFÉiÉä **1 1 6 ** 
iÉèãÉªÉÉäMÉgSÉ ºÉÆºBÉEÉ®ÉiºÉ´ÉÇ®ÉäMÉÉ{ÉcÉä àÉiÉ& * 
                                      (vÉ0 ÉÊx É0 , º ÉÖ´ ÉhÉÉÇÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
ÉÊiÉãÉiÉèãÉÆ MÉÖâó ºlÉèªÉÇ¤ÉãÉ´ÉhÉÇBÉE®Æ ºÉ®àÉÂ * 
´Éß−ªÉÆ ÉÊ´ÉBÉEÉÉÊ¶É ÉÊ´É¶ÉnÆ àÉvÉÖ®Æ ®ºÉ{ÉÉBÉEªÉÉä& **2 ** 
ºÉÚFàÉÆ BÉE−ÉÉªÉÉxÉÖ®ºÉÆ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÆ ´ÉÉiÉBÉE{ÉEÉ{ÉcàÉÂ * 
´ÉÉÒªÉæhÉÉä−hÉÆ ÉÊcàÉÆ º{É¶Éæ ¤ÉßchÉÆ ®BÉDiÉÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉßEiÉÂ **3 ** 
ãÉäJÉxÉÆ ¤ÉrÉÊ´ÉhàÉÚjÉÆ MÉ£ÉÉÇ¶ÉªÉÉÊ´É¶ÉÉävÉxÉàÉÂ * 
nÉÒ{ÉxÉÆ ¤ÉÖÉÊrnÆ àÉävªÉÆ BªÉ´ÉÉÉÊªÉ µÉhÉàÉäcxÉÖiÉÂ **4 ** 
gÉÉäjÉªÉÉäÉÊxÉÉÊ¶É®&¶ÉÚãÉxÉÉ¶ÉxÉÆ ãÉPÉÚiÉÉBÉE®àÉÂ * 
i´ÉSªÉÆ BÉEä¶ªÉÆ SÉ SÉFÉÖ−ªÉàÉ£ªÉ‹ä £ÉÉäVÉxÉä%xªÉlÉÉ **5 ** 
ÉÊUxxÉÉÊ£ÉxxÉSªÉÖiÉÉäÉÎi{É−]àÉÉÊlÉiÉFÉiÉÉÊ{ÉÉÎ\SÉiÉä * 
£ÉMxÉº{ÉÖEÉÊ]iÉÉÊ´ÉrÉÉÎMxÉnMvÉÉÊ´ÉÉÎ¶ãÉ−]nÉÉÊ®iÉä **6 ** 
iÉlÉÉsÉÊ£ÉciÉÉÊxÉ£ÉÇÖMxÉàÉßMÉBªÉÉQÉÉÉÊnÉÊ´ÉFÉiÉä * 
¤ÉºiÉÉè {ÉÉxÉèsxxÉºÉÆºBÉEÉ®ä xÉºªÉä BÉEhÉÉÇÉÊFÉ{ÉÚ®hÉä ** 
ºÉäBÉEÉ£ªÉ‹É´ÉMÉÉcä−ÉÖ ÉÊiÉãÉiÉèãÉÆ |É¶ÉºªÉiÉä **7 ** 
                                 (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊx É0 , iÉèãÉ ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
                      ÉÊiÉãÉiÉèãÉàÉãÉ‰®ÉäÉÊiÉ BÉEä¶ÉÆ àÉvÉÖ ®Æ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉBÉE−ÉÉªÉàÉÖ−hÉiÉÉÒFhÉàÉÂ * 
                      ¤ÉãÉBÉßEiBÉE{ÉE´ÉÉiÉVÉxiÉÖJÉVÉÇÚµ ÉhÉBÉEhbÚÉÊiÉc®Æ SÉ BÉEÉÉÎxiÉnÉÉÊªÉ **1 0 9 ** 
                                (®É0 ÉÊx É0 , FÉÉÒ®ÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
 
ªÉ´ÉÉx ÉÉÒ(º Éi´É) 
 
ªÉ´ÉÉxÉÉÒ BÉE]ÖÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉä−hÉÉ ´ÉÉiÉ¶ãÉä−àÉÉÊ´É−ÉÉàÉªÉÉxÉÂ **9 2 ** 
cÉÉÎxiÉ MÉÖãàÉÉän®Æ ¶ÉÚãÉÆ nÉÒ{ÉªÉiªÉÉ¶ÉÖ SÉÉxÉãÉàÉÂ * 
                                   (vÉ0  ÉÊx É0 , ¶ÉiÉ{ ÉÖ−{ÉÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
ªÉ´ÉÉxÉÉÒ BÉE]ÖBÉEÉ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉ iÉÉÒFhÉÉä−hÉÉ ®ÉäSÉxÉÉÒ ãÉPÉ Ö **1 2 0 4 ** 
nÉÒ{ÉxÉÉÒ {ÉÉSÉxÉÉÒ ØtÉÉ BÉE{ÉE¶ÉÖµÉEÉÊxÉãÉÉ{ÉcÉ * 
BÉßEÉÊàÉ¶ÉÚãÉÉän®ÉxÉÉcMÉÖãàÉPxÉÉÒ ÉÊ{ÉkÉBÉEÉä{ÉxÉÉÒ **1 2 0 5 ** 
                                   (BÉEè0 ÉÊx É0 , +ÉÉä−É ÉÊvÉ´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
ªÉ´ÉÉxÉÉÒ BÉE]ÖÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉä−hÉÉ´ÉÉiÉÉ¶ÉÇ& ¶ãÉä−àÉxÉÉÉÊ¶ÉxÉÉÒ * 
¶ÉÚãÉÉvàÉÉxÉBÉßEÉÊàÉSUÉÌnnàÉÉÌnxÉÉÒ nÉÒ{ÉxÉÉÒ {É®É **4 0 ** 
                                   (®É0 ÉÊx É0 , ÉÊ{É{{É ãªÉÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ)  CDXLI   
ªÉ´ÉÉxÉÉÒ{ÉÉSÉxÉÉÒâóSªÉÉiÉÉÒFhÉÉä−hÉÉBÉE]ÖBÉEÉãÉPÉÖ& **7 6 ** 
nÉÒ{ÉxÉÉÒ SÉ iÉlÉÉ ÉÊiÉBÉDiÉÉÉÊ{ÉkÉãÉÉ¶ÉÖµÉE¶ÉÖãÉØiÉ * 
´ÉÉiÉ¶ãÉä−àÉÉän®ÉxÉÉcMÉÖãàÉ{ãÉÉÒcBÉßEÉÊàÉ|ÉhÉÖiÉ **7 7 ** 
                                   (£ÉÉ0 |É0 ÉÊx É0 , c®É ÒiÉBÉDªÉÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
ªÉ´ÉÉxÉÉÒ BÉÖE−~¶ÉÚãÉPxÉÉÒ ØtÉÉÉÊ{ÉkÉÉÉÎMxÉ´ÉÉÌrxÉÉÒ 
                                    (¶ÉÉ0 ÉÊx É0 , c®ÉÒiÉ BÉDªÉÉÉÊn´ÉMÉÇ.) 
 
  CDXLII   
  
                                           INDEX 
Aadu-tinna-paalai- 88 
Aakaraadya- 182 
Aalubaalu– 43, 45 
Aamaabhaaji - 63 
Aapataa- 131 
Aarai velyakhera  -1 
Aasotaro- 131 
Aavanune- 220  
Aazi Khair  -1 
A. bracteata Retz. - 88 
A. dorsata - 214  
A. florea - 214 
A. indica - 214 
A. integrifolia  L.f. - 120 
Absinth- 38 
Absinthin- 39 
Acacia pennata (L.) Willd. -1 
Acalypha fruticosa Forsk. - 99 
Acalypha indica  L. - 63 
Acalyphamide - 65 
Acalyphine - 65 
Acetate buffer 5.5 pH - 307 
Acetic acid – 233, 307 
Acetic acid Sp. - 257 
Acetic Acid, Glacial - 307 
Acetic Acid, Lead-Free - 308 
Acetone - 308 
N-acetylnornuciferine- 89 
Acidic polysaccharide- 149 
Acidity - 250 
¡d¢r¤ -1 
Adavi ishapugorulu- 189 
Adiantaceae - 16 
Adiantone - 17 
Adiantoxide- 17 
Adiantum capillus-veneris  L.  - 16 
Adris ¢nuj - 175  
Aduthinapalai- 88 
Aechmandra epigaea Arn. - 167 
Aesculetin- 189 
Aflatoxins - 288  
Afsanteen- 38 
Agavaceae- 104 
α-Agrofuran - 130 
  CDXLIII  Aizoaceae- 54, 101,182,187 
Ajaina satva- 226 
Ajamo - 78 
Ajavaan phulla- 226 
Ajavana - 78 
Ajmod - 78 
Ajmoda Oova - 78 
Ajmuda - 78 
Ajowan - 78 
Ajvaayan kaa Sat- 226 
Ajvayana sat- 226 
Ajya- 204 
¡k¢ºagaru ²a- 167 
¡k¢sam ¢¼si - 12, 14  
Akasa tamarai - 70 
Akasa thamara - 70 
Akasha garudagadde- 167 
Akashagarudi- 167 
Akharij– 94, 96 
Akujemudu- 127 
Alaicha- 165 
Alanine- 37 
Albaspidin- 159 
Alcohol - 308 
Alcohol, Aldehyde-free - 309 
Alcohol, Sulphate-free - 309 
9-Aliphatic alcohols- 159 
Alkaloid Estimation - 251 
Alkaloid punarnavine - 102 
Alkaloidal Assays - 245 
Alkaloids – 33, 58, 65, 81, 140, 146, 186, 
192 
Alkanes - 174 
Alpinia calcarata  Rosc. - 59 
Alubakraapandu– 43, 45 
Alubalu– 43, 45 
Alubukhara– 43, 45 
¡luka– 43, 45 
Aluvaalu– 43, 45 
Amalbeda- 196 
Amalbeda- 196 
Amaradudheli-193 
Amaranthaceae- 148 
Amarpoi- 124 
Ambha- 208  
Ambu- 208  
Amentoflavone - 170 
Amino acids- 37  CDXLIV  Ammanpatchaiarisi- 23 
Ammonia buffer solutions 9.5 pH- 310 
Ammonia solution Sp. - 257 
Ammonia Solution, Iron-free- 310 
Ammonia, x N - 310 
Ammoniacal solution of Copper oxide 
(Cuoxam) - 234 
Ammonia-cyanide solution Sp. - 259 
Ammonia-cyanide wash solution- 260 
Ammonium chloride- 255 
Ammonium Chloride Solution  - 310 
Ammonium citrate solution Sp. - 259 
Ammonium molybdate- 310 
Ammonium oxalate AsT - 252 
Ammonium Thiocyanate- 310 
Ammonium Thiocyanate Solution- 310 
Ammonium Thiocyanate, 0.1N- 310 
Amomum subulatum Roxb. - 165 
Amorphophallus sylvaticus (Roxb.) Kunth -5 
¡mragandhi-guggulu -3  
A¼º umat ¤- 139  
α- Amyrin - 74 
β-Amyrin- 74, 84, 174 , 195 
Analan ¢m¢- 133 
Anasapuveru- 171  
Andamarine- 87 
Anetaa- 106 
Angeloylcumambrin B- 62 
Angleloylajadin- 62 
Aniline chloride solution- 233 
Aniline chloride solution- 310 
Anisaldehyde-Sulphuric Acid Reagent- 310 
Anisoelol- 162 
Anisomeles malabarica  (L.) R. Br. ex Sims- 
160 
Anisomelic acid- 162 
Anisomelin- 162 
Anisomelode- 162 
Anisomelyl acetate- 162 
Annashuppu- 171  
Anogeissus latifolia  Wall. -34, 36 
Ansafal- 171  
Antara gange - 70 
Antara-Tamara - 70 
Anthraquinone derivatives- 238 
Anushappu- 171  
Apa- 208  
Apiaceae - 12, 14, 78   CDXLV  Apidae- 214 
Apigenin- 116, 125, 170 
3',4 ',5 ' apigenin- 114 
Apigenin 5-glucoside- 46 
Apigenin-7-rhamnoglucoside- 184 
Apigenin-8-C-glucoside- 184 
Apium graveolens L.  - 78 
Apta- 131 
Apu ¾paphalada- 120 
Ara ´ya-s¦ra ´a -5 
Araaruta- 7 
Araceae- 5, 70, 156 
¡r¢ro °a - 7 
Ararut- 7 
Archangelone- 15 
Are- 131 
Arecaceae- 90, 191 
Arecaceae- 90 
Argemone Oil - 249 
Āri  -1 
Ari- 131 
Aristolactam- 89 
Aristolochia bracteolata Lam. - 88 
Aristolochiaceae- 88,129 
Aristolochic acid - 89 
Arjunolic acid - 100 
Aromadendrin- 53 
Arsenic- 252 
Arsenic solution, dilute, AsT- 252 
Arsenic solution, strong, AsT- 252 
Arsenomolybdic Acid Reagent -311 
Arteglasin A- 62 
Artemisia absinthium L. - 38 
Artocarpus heterophyllus  Lamk. - 120 
Aruruttukkilangu- 7 
Asaarun- 129 
Asabarag- 160 
Asanta- 131 
Asarak- 160 
α-Asarone- 130 
Asaroon- 129 
Asarum europaeum L. - 129 
Asclepiadaceae -  73,193 
Ashta- 131 
Ashtaa- 131 
Asitak ¢raskara- 173 
Aºmariripu - 66 
Asparagosides- 42  CDXLVI  Asparagus - 41 
Asparagus officinalis L.  - 41 
Asparagusic acid- 42 
Asparasaponin I- 42 
Asparasaponin II- 42 
β-Aspidin- 159 
Aspidium filix-mas L. - 158 
Asteraceae- 38,83,92,94,96,198 
Asteraceae Chinnapatr ¢- 61 
Asthi º¨ ¬khal ¢ - 9 
Asthisamh ¨ta - 9 
Asthma weed- 23 
Astragalin- 17, 31 
Asundro- 131 
Atapatiyan - 73 
Atib ¨hatphala- 120 
Atimukt ¢- 106 
Atimuktaka- 106 
Atropine – 76 
Atu-tinlap- 88 
Avanti- 83 
Axle – wood-34, 36 
Ayamodakum - 78 
Azulene- 39, 53 
Baadiyaan- 171  
Baadiyaan khataai- 171  
Baadiyaane khataai- 171  
Baakali-34, 36 
Baara aliachi- 165 
Bad elaach- 165 
Badaa alaicha- 165 
Badi dudhdi- 23 
Badi ilaayachi- 165 
Badi kateli- 26 
Badi kateri- 26 
Bagaura - 61 
Bahnaree– 152, 154 
Bahuguni- 115 
Bahuka ´°aka- 127 
Bahuv ¢ra ª– 152, 154 
Bahuvar– 152, 154 
Bainchaa- 163 
Bainchi-kul- 163 
Baird-Parker Agar Medium - 267 
Bajar- 185 
Bajni- 185 
Bajra- 185  CDXLVII  Bajri- 185 
Balabhadr ¢- 175  
Balarakkasi-gidaa- 51 
Balsamodendron caudata  Mauch.-3 
Baltang- 189 
Baltanga- 189 
Balukaasaaga- 187 
Banajuani - 78 
Banne- 131 
Banni- 142 
Bano Kundri - 19, 21  
Bansang- 145 
Banyamani - 78 
Bara elachi- 165 
Baraa-elaachi- 165 
Barakherui- 23 
Barre- 92 
Bartang- 189 
Bartung- 189 
Basriookharad - 177  
Bastard saffron– 92, 94, 96 
Bauhinia racemosa  Lamk. - 131 
Bauraj- 131 
Bed  Sada- 169 
Bella -206 
Bellam-206 
Bengal gram- 29 
Benkar- 106 
Bent- 191 
Berbamine- 33 
Berberidaceae- 32 
Berberine- 33, 81 
Berberis aristata DC. - 32 
Bergenin - 138 
Beta- 191 
Betasu- 191 
Bethagokhru- 56 
Betulin- 116 
Betulinic acid- 162, 174 
Bh ¦- n ¤l¤- 150 
Bh ¦ra ´²¤- 66 
Bh ¦rigandh ¢- 12, 14  
Bh ¦take ¹£ - 12, 14  
Bhadrail¢- 165 
Bhagapatr ¢- 68 
Bhakhada- 56 
Bhakhar- 56  CDXLVIII  Bhan °¢k¤- 26 
Bhekal- 163 
Bhisata- 182 
Bhissata- 182 
Bhonkar– 152, 154 
Bhrangaraja- 83 
Bhuin Kumdda - 108 
Bhursunga- 145 
Bhurundi - 66 
Bhushan- 169 
Bhutakesi - 12, 14  
Bhuvana- 208  
Bignoniaceae- 135 
B¤japatr ¢ - 16 
Bilangra- 163 
Bilikomme- 101 
Bimb £ - 19, 21  
Bimbik ¢- 19, 21  
Bimbu - 19, 21  
Bincha- 163 
Biochenin-A-7-glucoside- 31 
Bis- 169 
Bisauraa- 158 
Bismarck brown- 233 
Bismuth Sulphite Agar Medium - 268 
Biswal  -1 
Bjr- 185 
Bobbaasi- 47, 49 
Bodi Ajamo - 78 
Bonajain - 78 
Bone setter - 9 
Bonjamani - 78 
Boppayi- 47, 49 
Boraginaceae– 66, 152, 154, 177 
Borajhanji - 70 
Borax - 311 
Boric acid- 255 
Bornyl acetate- 62 
Boromali- 106 
Borthekera- 196 
Bracteated birthwort- 88 
Brassica campestris  L. - 220  
Brassicaceae- 220  
Breamer’s reagent - 234 
B¨hadel ¢- 165 
B¨hat Dugdhik ¢ - 23 
B¨hat el ¢- 165  CDXLIX  B¨hat ¤ - 26 
B¨hatka ´°ak ¢r¤- 26 
Brilliant Green Agar Medium - 268 
Brominated hydrochloric acid AsT- 252 
Bromine Solution- 311 
Bromine solution AsT - 253 
Bromophenol Blue Indicator- 311 
Bryhoti- 26 
Bryonia epigaea Rottler- 167 
Bryonin - 168 
Budi eleichi- 165 
Buffer solution pH 2.5- 260 
Buffered Sodium Chloride-Peptone Solution 
pH 7.0 - 269 
Bullrush millet- 185 
Burseraceae-3 
3-n-butyl phthalide- 79 
Buut- 29 
Byakura- 26 
C. aromaticus Benth. - 124 
C. cordifolia  Cogn , - 19, 21  
C.indica  W & A - 19, 21  
C. myxa  Roxb. – 152, 154 
C. obliqua Willd. – 152, 154 
1-Caffeylglucose- 17  
γ-Cadinene- 62 
Cadmium- 252 
Caesalpiniaceae- 131 
Calactin- 195 
Calamenene- 62 
Calamus rotang  L. - 191 
Calamus thwaitesii  Becc. - 90 
Caldera Bush- 86 
Calotropagenin- 195 
Calotropin- 195 
Cambogin- 197 
Campesterol- 17 
Campesterol- 87 
Campesterol- 93 
Camphor - 60 
Camphor- 210  
Canada balsam (as a Mountant) - 234 
Canada Balsam Reagent- 311 
Ca ´aka - 29 
Candra- 210  
Cane- 191 
n- Caproic acid-53 
Carbon Tetrachloride - 312  CDL  Cardenolides - 195 
Carica papaya  L. - 47, 49 
Caricaceae- 47, 49 
β-Carotene - 48 
Carmapatra - 202 
β - Carophyllene- 62 
Carpaine – 48, 50 
Carpesanine - 50 
Carthamin - 97 
Carthamus  tinctorius L. – 92, 94, 96 
Carvacrol- 125 
β-Caryophyllene- 125 
Casein Soyabean Digest Agar Medium- 269 
(+)-Catechin- 170 
Caustic Alkali Solution, 5 per cent- 312 
Celogenamide- 149 
Celosia argentea L. - 148 
Celosian- 149 
Cenkalunir kilanku- 68 
Cenkiluvai Ilai-3 
Cenkotivel- 133 
Cephalandra indica  Naud.  - 19, 21  
Cephalandrine - 20 
Cephalandrine A – 20, 22  
Cephalandrine B– 20, 22 
Ceruppatai - 177  
Ceryl alcohol- 89 
Cetrimide Agar Medium - 269 
Chaachi bet- 191 
Chaalmagraa- 180 
Chaalmograa- 180 
Chaarigehuli- 196 
Chakka- 120 
Chalcone- 138 
Chalcone diglycoside- 130 
Challe kaayi– 152 
Chamanti - 61 
Chanaa- 29 
Chandra kaasi soppa- 182 
Chandramukhi - 61 
Chandrasi koora- 182 
Chane- 29 
Chanya- 29 
Charanai- 80 
Charcoal, Decolourising- 312 
Chary hannu– 43, 45 
Chatrake ºara- 75 
Chaulmugra- 180  CDLI  Chaulmugraa- 180 
Cheetaa- 133 
Chekkera- 218  
Chelubaaladgidh - 66 
Chemmaram- 135 
Chendurakam- 92 
Chenna- 156 
Chentukam– 94, 96 
Chepputhatteku - 177  
Chepututaku- 129 
Cheru vazhuthalai- 26 
Cheru vazhuthina- 26 
Cherupadi - 177  
Cherychettu– 43, 45 
Chhagal bete-193 
Chhevvu-kurti- 115 
Chhikur- 142 
Chholaa- 29 
Chhonkar- 142 
Chhotaa Kiraayataa- 115 
Chhotaagokshru- 56 
Chick pea- 29 
Chikkachalli- 154 
Chilgoja- 118 
Chilgojha- 118 
Chilgojhaa- 118 
Chilgoza- 118 
Chilgoza pine- 118 
Chilgozaa- 118 
Chilgozah- 118 
Chini- 218  
Chinna kuppi- 99 
Chinni- 99 
Chinnigida- 99 
Chinni-Ka Jhar- 99 
Chinnnimara- 99 
Chirchitta- 75 
Chiri- 118 
Chirimaanu-34, 36 
Chiritta- 75 
Chirrigalgoja- 118 
Chitra- 32 
Chitraa- 32 
Chittaratha- 59 
Chitti benda- 51 
Chloral Hydrate- 312 
Chloral Hydrate Solution - 313 
Chloral hydrate solution- 234  CDLII  Chloral iodine- 234 
Chloral Iodine Solution - 313 
Chlorinated soda solution (Bleaching 
solution) - 234 
Chloroform - 313 
Chlorogenic acid- 189 
Chlorziniciodine (Iodinated zinc chloride 
solution) - 234 
Cholesterol- 93 
Choti Jala-kumbhi - 70 
Chromic acid solution- 234 
Chrysanthemum - 61 
Chrysanthemum indicum L.- 61 
Chrysanthenine glucoside- 62 
Chrysanthenone- 62 
Chrysin 7-glucoside- 46 
Chrysoeriol- 125 
Chrysophanic acid- 189 
Chunnaa- 29 
Chural- 191 
Chutakkapuram- 210  
Chuvannakkoduveli- 133 
Cicer arietinum  L. - 29 
Cilagoja- 118 
Cineol – 60, 166 
1,8- cineole-125 
1,8-cineol- 62 
Cinnamomum camphora  (L.) Nees & 
Eberm. - 210  
Cinnamomum Oil- 200 
Cinnamomum zeylanicum  Blume- 200 
Cinnamon oil- 200 
Cirsilineol- 87 
Cirsimaritin- 125 
Ciruceruppatai- 182 
Cissus quadrangularis L.  - 9 
Citrate-cyanide wash solution- 260 
Citric acid- 81, 188 
Citric acid AsT- 253 
Clarified butter- 204 
Clarified Cow’s Butter- 204 
Clove- 212  
Clustered Hiptage- 106 
Coccinia grandis  (L.) Voigt - 19, 21  
Coldenia procumbens L.  - 177  
Coleus amboinicus Lour. - 124 
Combretaceae-34, 36 
Commiphora caudata  Engl.-3  CDLIII  Common Asarbacca- 129 
Common rattan- 191 
1-Coumarylgalactose- 17 
Coniferae- 118 
Convolvulaceae - 108 
Copper Sulphate - 314 
Copper Sulphate, Anhydrous - 314 
Corallin soda- 234 
Corallocarpenoyl ester- 168 
Corallocarpus epigaeus Benth. ex Hook. f. - 
167 
Corallocarpuscalarolide- 168 
Cordia dichotoma  Forst. f. – 152, 154 
Cork Swallow-wort - 73 
Coroglaucigenin- 195 
Cottonseed oil - 249 
6-O-(E)-p -coumaroyl glucopyranose- 164 
Coumarin – 13, 15 
N-(P-coumaroyl) tryptamine- 93 
Coumestan- 84 
Country borage- 124 
Crategolic acid- 125 
Cresol Red - 314 
Cresol Red Solution - 314 
Cucurbitaceae - 19, 21, 167  
Curcumene- 62 
Curcumin - 342 
Curry leaf- 145 
Cyanidine-3-glucoside- 71 
Cyanogenic glycoside- 31,65 
Cycloart-25-en-3- β-24-diol- 128 
Cycloartenol – 121, 128 
Cycloartenone – 121 
Cycloeucalenol- 128 
Cyclonivuliaol - 128 
p-Cymene- 125, 166  
D. barbiflora - 158  
D. blandtorchi - 158  
D. marginata - 158 
D. odontoloma - 158 
D. schimperiane - 158 
D¢² ima pu ¾pa- 135 
D¢² imacchada- 135 
D¢runis ¢- 32 
D¢rusit ¢ Taila - 200 
D¢rvi- 32 
D¤pyaka - 78 
Daalchini taila- 200  CDLIV  Daarhaldi- 32 
Daaruchini taila- 200 
Daaruhalada- 32 
Daaruhaldar- 32 
Daaruhaldi- 32 
Daaruharidraa- 32 
Daarunaj-akrabi- 198 
Daemia extensa (Jacq.) R.Br.- 193 
Dahan- 80 
Daka- 208  
Dalachini nune- 200 
Dalcina taila- 200 
Damm-ul-Akhwain- 104 
Dandaa thohara- 127 
Darhald- 32 
Darhaldi- 32 
Darunaj Aqrabi- 198 
Darusita taila- 200 
Daucosterol- 87 
Demethoxysudachitin- 114 
Dengaabheji- 26 
Desmocarpin - 140 
Desmodin- 140 
Desmodium gangeticum DC. - 139 
Desoxycholate-Citrate Agar Medium- 269 
Dev ¤- 160 
Devadhup-3 
Devakusuma - 212  
Dextrin - 8 
Dhaau-34, 36 
Dhaauyaa gaachh-34, 36 
Dhaavaa-34, 36 
Dhaavado-34, 36 
Dhaavdaa-34, 36 
Dhar ¢- 111 
Dhauraa-34, 36 
Dhav-34, 36 
Dhava -34, 36 
Dhaval-34, 36 
Dh ¦mrapatr ¢- 88 
Dhurandhara-34, 36 
Di and  sesquiterpenoids α-copaene- 62 
Diasarone-1- 130 
Diasarone-2- 130 
Dihydroasparagusic acid- 42 
(2S)- 7,3'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxyflavan- 105 
3',5 '-dihydoxy-4'-methoxywogonin- 114 
4, 5 -dihydroxy -3,6,7 -trimethoxyflavone -  CDLV  162 
Dikaamaali- 113 
Dikaamaari- 113 
Dikamali- 113 
Dikemaali- 113 
Dikkaamalli- 113 
Dikkamali- 113 
Dilk– 152, 154 
Dilute acetic acid Sp. - 257 
Dilute ammonia solution Sp. - 257 
Dilute Hydrochloric Acid- 319 
Dilute hydrochloric acid Sp. - 257 
Dilute standard lead solution- 259 
2-(N,N-dimethyl amino)acetophenone- 140 
Dinduge-34, 36 
Dioleolinolein- 93, 119 
Diosgenin – 76, 102 
Diosmetin – 74, 109 
Diosmetin-7- O-β− glucoside - 109 
Diospyros embryopteris  L. - 173 
Diospyros peregrina  Gurke- 173 
Diphenylamine barium sulphonate - 314 
Dipterocarpaceae- 137 
Disodium Ethylenediamine tetraacetate 
Diterpenoids- 162 
Dithizone- 315 
Dithizone extraction solution- 259 
Dithizone-carbon tetrachloride solution- 260 
D-mandelonitrile- β-gentiobioside 
dehydrowogonin 7-glucoside - 46 
D-mandelonitril- β- glucoside – 44, 46 
Dodda gejjalakai- 163 
Dodda yalakki- 165 
Dodee - 73 
Dodi Shak - 73 
Doduchallu- 154 
Donda tige - 19, 21  
Dorli- 26 
Doronicum hookeri  C.B.Clarke- 198 
Dotriacont-22,25-diol-10-one- 168 
Dotriacontane- 188 
Dracaena cinnabari Balf.  f. - 104 
Dragendorff Á  Ás Reagent - 315 
Dragon ΄s blood- 104 
Dropterin- 159 
Dryopteridaceae- 158 
Dryopteris filix – mas (L.) Schott. - 158 
Dudali- 23  CDLVI  Dudeli- 23 
Dudhelo- 23 
Dudhi- 23 
Dudili- 23 
Dudoli- 23 
Dugdhik ¢- 23 
Dumparastramu- 59 
Duserasag- 182 
Dustapuchettu-193 
Dustuputige-193 
Duyi papata  - 122  
Dv ¤p¢ntara ¹at ¢var ¤ - 41 
Dv ¤p¢ntara Damanaka - 38 
Dv ¤p¢ntara Tagara- 129 
Dvij ¢y¢¬g¤- 101 
E. hysoppifolium  (Willd.) Verd. - 115 
E. littorale Blume- 115 
E. pilulifera Auct. non L. - 23 
Ebenaceae- 173 
Edible pine- 118 
EDTA solution 0.05 M- 315 
Ekalipta- 222 
Elav ¢lukam – 43, 45 
Elavaaluka– 43, 45 
Ellagic acid - 37 
Ellagotannins - 24 
Ellu- 224 
Elluenna- 224 
Eluka– 43, 45 
β-Elumene- 62 
Emodin- 189 
Enicoflavin- 116 
Enicostemma axillare (Lam.) A. Raynal. - 
115 
Eosin- 234, 315 
Eosin Solution- 315 
Epegenin - 181 
Ephelic acid glycoside- 116 
Epigaeusyl ester- 168 
Era ´²akarka °¤ - 47, 49 
Erandakaakadi- 47, 49 
Erandakharbujaa- 47, 49 
Ericaceae - 202 
Eriochrome Black T- 315 
Eriochrome Black T indicator 0.1per cent 
solution- 315 
Eriodyctol- 125  CDLVII  Errachitramulam- 133 
Erythrocentaurine- 116 
Escherichia coli  - 277 
Esculin- 184 
Eskadantikura- 187 
Esters - 251 
Ethyl Acetate- 315 
Ethyl Alcohol- 315 
Ethyl salicylate- 125 
Eucalyptus- 222 
Eucalyptus globulus  Labill- 222 
Eucalyptus Oil- 222 
Eugenia caryophyllus  (Spreng) Sprague- 
212  
Eugenol- 125 
Euphorbia hirta  L. - 23 
Euphorbia nivulia  Buch.-Ham. - 127 
Euphorbiaceae- 23, 63, 99, 127 
European willow- 169 
Euscaphic acid- 125 
F. ramontchii   Herit. - 163 
Fabaceae- 29, 139, 150 
β – Farnesene- 62 
Fargesin- 62 
Fatty Oil  Estimation - 249 
Fehling’s Solution - 316 
Ferric chloride solution- 234 
Ficoidaceae- 101 
Fiehe’s test - 338 
Filicin - 159 
Filixic acid- 159 
Filmarone- 159 
Fixed Oil – 237 
Flacourside - 164 
Flacourtia indica  (Burm.f.) Merr. - 163 
Flacourtiaceae- 163, 180 
α-Flavaspidic acid- 159 
Flavellagic acid- 37 
Flavone- 162 
Flavonoid – 24, 31, 55, 109, 140, 186, 192 
Flavonoid glycosides- 58 
Flavonol glycosides - 172  
Fluid Casein Digest-Soya Lecithin-
Polysorbate 20 Medium - 270 
Fluid Lactose Medium - 270 
Fluid Selenite-Cystine Medium - 273 
Foal foot- 129 
Folin Ciocalteu Reagent- 317 
Forest pepper- 80  CDLVIII  Formaldehyde Solution - 316 
Formaldehyde Solution, Dilute - 317 
Formic acid- 317 
Fragilin- 170 
Fragrant Screwpine- 86 
Friedelan-3-one- 10 
Fructose – glucose ratio - 341 
G. arborea Roxb. - 113 
G. molluginoides  Wt. - 187 
Gaabh- 173 
Gaara- 173 
Gab- 173 
Gadabani- 101 
Gadida gadapa- 88 
Gai Ghia- 204 
Gaija soppu- 101 
Gakhura- 56 
Galgoja- 118 
Gallic acid – 35, 155, 174 
(+)-Gallocatechin- 170 
Gallotannins- 37 
Gandapuro - 202 
Gandhamadan ¤- 12, 14  
Gandha ºiph ¢ - 51 
Gandhap ¦ra  Patra Taila - 202 
Gandhapura - 202 
Gandhapura tailam - 202 
Gandhapuraa kaa tel - 202 
Gandhap ūrna taila - 202 
Gandhapuro - 202 
Gandharaajan- 113 
Gandhibuti- 182 
Gandibudi- 182 
Gandibuti- 182 
Gandpuro - 202 
Ganger- 75 
Gangetin- 140 
Gangetinin- 140 
Gangro- 75 
Gantelu- 185 
Gantia- 185 
Garbanzol- 31 
Garcinia pedunculata  Roxb. - 196 
Garcinol- 197 
Gardenia gummifera L. f. - 113 
Gardenin - 114 
Gargari- 83 
Garudphala- 180  CDLIX  Gathi tagara- 129 
Gaultheria fragrantissima  Wall. - 202 
Gaura-34, 36 
Gava Ghee- 204 
Gava Ghrit- 204 
Gaya Ghee- 204 
Gaya ka ghee- 204 
Genkwanin - 116 
Genkwanin 5-glucoside- 46 
Gentiana kurroo Royle - 175  
Gentianaceae- 115, 175 
Gentianic acid - 176 
Gentianine- 116 
Gentiocrucine- 116 
Germacrene-D- 62 
Ghanas ¢ra- 210  
Ghee- 204 
Ghetkochu- 156 
Ghilodi - 19, 21  
Ghimasak- 54 
Gholam - 19, 21  
Ghrta- 204 
Gilaas– 43, 45 
Gingely oil- 224 
Girij ¢- 175  
Gisekia pharnaceoides L. - 187 
Gittapakau-193 
Glinus lotoides L. - 182 
Glucose- 93  
2´-O-glucosides- 55 
Glycerine- 234, 317 
Glycerine Solution - 318 
Gobor sitha  - 122  
Goda-cani- 101 
Godasurana-5 
Godnimb- 145 
Gogh ¨ta - 204 
Gok ¾ura - 56 
Gok ¾uraka- 56 
Gokharaa- 56 
Gokhru- 56 
Gokhuree- 56 
Gokshra- 56 
Gokshur- 56 
Gokshura- 56 
Gokshuraka- 56 
Gondali - 70 
Gondri lota - 177   CDLX  Gop ¢lakarka °¤- 47, 49 
Gopaka ´°aª- 163 
Gornimb- 145 
Governors plum- 163 
Gr ¤¾ machatraka - 54 
Gram- 29 
Grampu- 212  
Granthim ¦la - 59 
Granthi-p¢dik ¢- 158 
Guda -206 
Guggilam- 137 
Gugulsterones - 4 
Gulad ¢ud ¤ - 61 
Guldaaudi - 61 
Gule-dawoodi - 61 
Gulvidi- 115 
Gummy Gardenia- 113 
Gundaa– 152 
Gundaavada– 152 
Gunobar- 118 
Guttiferae- 196 
H. laurifolia  (Dennst.) Sleummer. - 180 
H. wightiana  Blume- 180 
Haadabhanga gachha - 9 
Haadjodaa - 9 
Haadsaankal - 9 
Haathishundaa - 66 
Haathisudhaan - 66 
Haathisundha - 66 
Haathisuondha - 66 
Hadajoda - 9 
Hadjoda - 9 
Haematoxylin, Delafield’s- 234 
Haladvel- 106 
Haliyoon - 41 
Halphen Test - 249 
Halyun - 41 
Hamsapadu - 177  
Hanspadi - 16 
Hansraaja - 16 
Harbaraa- 29 
Harimantha ª- 29 
Harinahada- 135 
Haritama ®jar ¤ - 63 
Harjora - 9 
Ha ¼sapad ¤sad ¨º¢- 16  CDLXI  Hasti ºu´²¤ - 66 
Hatapochha- 129 
Hathichikar- 56 
Havisya- 204 
Hebba alasu- 120 
Heel kalan- 165 
Heggullu- 26 
Heliotrine - 67 
Heliotropium indicum  L.  - 66 
Hemakedara- 124 
Hemam ¦l¢- 80 
Hentriacontanol 
n-heptacosane- 136 
Hexadeca  aspidinol- 159 
n- Hexane - 318 
Hi ¬gun ¢² ik ¢- 113 
Hikke- 160 
Hikua - 41 
Hillua - 41 
Him ¢hv ¢- 210  
Himab ¢luka- 210  
Hinesol-β-D-fucopyranoside - 95 
Hiptage benghalensis  L. - 106 
Hiraadakhana- 104 
Hiraadokhi- 104 
Holetupare- 173 
Honey- 214 
β – Humulene- 62 
Hunmunaki- 163 
Hydnocarpin- 181 
Hydnocarpus pentandra (Buch.-Ham.) 
Oken- 180 
Hydrochloric Acid – 257, 318, 319 
Hydrochloric acid (constant-boiling 
composition) AsT - 253 
Hydrochloric acid AsT- 253 
Hydrochloric Acid, Iron-Free- 319 
Hydrochloric Acid, N- 319 
Hydrogen Peroxide Solution- 319 
p-Hydroxybenzoic acid- 87 
2-Hydroxychalcone - 105 
4′-hydroxychalcone-4- O-β-D-
glucopyranoside - 138 
7-hydroxy-3-(3-hydroxy-4-methoxybenzyl) 
chroman- 105 
Hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution Sp. – 
259, 320 
Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride;  CDLXII  Hydroxylammonium Chloride- 319 
4-hydroxy-2-methoxtdihydrochalcone- 105 
12 α-hydroxy-3-oxo-olenano-28,13-lactone - 
138 
Ilaayachi badi- 165 
IIaikkalli- 127 
Ilakalli- 127 
Illicium verum  Hook. f. - 171 
Imas- 29 
Indian Acalypha- 63 
Indian barberry- 32 
Indian borage- 124 
Indian Gaub- 173 
Indian gentian - 175  
Indian Jack fruit- 120 
Indian Nightshade- 26 
Indian Turnsole - 66 
Indian-Wintergreen - 202 
Indicine N-oxide - 67 
Indigofera aspalathoides  Vahl ex DC. - 150 
Indioside - 28 
Ind ¤vara - 68 
Indramaris- 63 
Inulin - 239 
Iodine and Potassium iodide solution- 235 
Iodine water - 235 
Ipomoea  tridentata (L.) Roth.  - 108 
Irippanpul - 108 
Iruvi- 158 
Iso-absinthin- 39 
trans & cis -Isoasarones- 130 
Isohydnocarpine methoxyhydnocarpin- 181 
Isopentacosanoic acid- 10 
2-isopropyl-5-methylphenol- 226 
Isoquercitrin- 17, 31, 132, 170 
Isorhamnetin- 31 
Isorhamnetin-3-gentiotrioside- 58 
Isorhamnetin-3- O-β-D-glucoside- 170 
Isoshinanolone- 134 
Isoswertisin-5- O-glucoside- 116 
Isoterrestrosin B- 58 
Isovalaraldehyde- 53 
Isovaleric-53 
Isovitexin- 116 
Ivy gourd - 19, 21  
Iya kozhundu  -1 
J¤van ¤- 73 
J¤vant ¤ - 73  CDLXIII  Jack-fruit tree- 120 
Jaggery-206 
Jal- 208  
Jala - 208  
Jala- 208  
Jalakumbh ¤ - 70 
Jalakumbhi - 70 
Jalakumbhi - 70 
Jalashamkhala - 70 
Jammi- 142 
Jand- 142  
Jangali isabgola- 189 
Jangali-Ola-5 
Jangli-kalimirch- 80 
Jatrorhizine- 33 
Javaain sara- 226 
Jeddu betta- 90 
Jenetuppa- 214  
Jhand- 142 
Jhartam– 94, 96 
Jimasaka- 54 
Jivanti - 73 
Jiwanti - 73 
Juaani saram- 226 
Jui  - 122  
Juktiruhi-193 
Kaadumenagu- 80 
Kaalaa Hansraja - 16 
Kaalaavaalaa- 51 
Kaalo hansaraaj - 16 
Kaandvel - 9 
Kaankod- 163 
Kaaphoraa- 210  
Kaapur- 210  
Kabandha- 208  
Kabanni- 142 
Kabba- 137 
Kachnal- 131 
Kadalai- 29 
Kadale- 29 
Kada-todali- 80 
Kadavi Ghilodi - 19, 21  
Kadavinai- 167 
Kadhi Patta- 145 
Kadhilimdo- 145 
Kadhinim- 145 
Kadi Patta- 145 
Kadu - 175   CDLXIV  Kadu manthara- 131 
Kaduguennai- 220 
Kadukavatha- 180 
Kadukuenna- 220  
Kaduva Taila- 220  
Kadvi naahi- 167 
Kadvi naai- 115 
Kadvinai- 167 
Kaempferol- 65 
Kaempferol-3-glucoside - 31 
Kaempferol-3-glucuronide- 17 
Kaempferol-3-O-rutinoside- 17 
Kai °arya- 145 
Kai ²arya- 145 
Kaimaavu-3 
Kainchi kakudi - 19, 21  
Kaka toddali- 80 
Kakaiyaa- 163 
Kaker- 163 
Kakra  - 122  
K¢laskandha- 173 
Kalowalo- 51 
Kalsarji- 83 
Kambu- 185 
Kampanitirai - 175  
Kampu- 185 
Kanabhaturi - 19, 21  
Kanaveguchettu- 163 
Kanchana- 131 
Kandamurgarittam- 104 
Kandregu- 163 
Kandwaari vaddi- 26 
Kanghu- 163 
Kanja- 80 
Kankata- 163 
Kankra  - 122  
Kannikurukka- 124 
Kantal- 120 
Ka ´°ak ¤gulma - 75 
Kanthal- 120 
Kantheikoli- 163 
Kapparillaku- 124 
Kapur- 210  
Kapura - 210  
Karad- 92 
Karadihanni - 175  
Karadu- 148 
Karafs - 78  CDLXV  Karampu- 212  
Karaphs ¢ - 78 
Karayampoovu- 212  
Kardai– 92, 94, 96 
Kardi- 92, 94, 96 
Karial-193 
Kariaphulli- 145 
Karibaevu- 145 
Karibandit- 115 
Karinguva- 113 
Karinkuvvalam- 68 
Karivempu- 145 
Karivemu- 145 
Karivepaku- 145 
Kariveppu- 145 
Karmaasu- 47, 49 
Karpooree- 160 
Karpoorvallee- 160 
Irattai Peymarutti- 160 
Karpram- 210  
Karpur- 210  
Karpura- 210  
Karp ¦ra - 210 
Karpuraamu- 210  
Karpurahalli- 124 
Karpuram- 210  
Karpuravalli- 124 
Kartum- 92 
Karumatti- 47, 49 
Karunai- 167 
Karunkuvalam- 68 
Karusakaya  -1 
Karutankilanku- 167 
Karuv ¢pa °°ai E ´´ a- 200 
Karuva patte enna- 200 
Karuveppilei- 145 
Kashur-gul- 189 
Kasmal- 32 
Kasube– 94, 96 
Kataai- 26,163 
Katahal- 120 
Katahala- 120 
Katal- 29,120 
Katalai- 29 
Kate gokhru- 56 
Kath sigu- 127 
Katha pengu  - 122  
Kathachmpa  - 122   CDLXVI  Kathal- 120 
Kathar- 120 
Kathhekirubanagida- 88 
Kattatti- 173 
Katthohar- 127 
Kattu-Karunaikizhanagu-5 
Kattumilagu- 80 
Ka °ugulma - 80 
Kat-ukala- 163 
Ka °ukapittha- 180 
Ka °un ¢h¤- 167 
Ka °upatra- 129 
Katusneha- 220  
Katutaila- 220  
Kausumbha– 94, 96 
Kavikattai- 173 
Kedagi- 86 
Keeldaaru- 158 
Kempacitramulam- 133 
Kempu chitramula- 133 
Kendu- 173 
Keora- 86 
Keori- 86 
Ke ºahantr ¤- 142 
Kesandara- 83 
Ke ºar ¢ja- 83 
Ketak ¤ - 86 
Ketaka- 86 
Ketoki- 86 
Kevadaa- 86 
Kevda- 86 
Kevdaa- 86 
Kewado- 86 
Kewda- 86 
Kewdaa- 86 
Keya- 86 
Khadiravall ¤ -1 
Khajoti- 63 
Khar-e-khasak khurd- 56 
Kheejado- 142 
Kheerakhodee - 73 
Khejra- 142 
Khervelya  -1 
Khokali- 99 
Khokli- 63 
Khoonkharaabaa- 104 
Khunkhaaraa- 104 
Khunkharaabaa- 104  CDLXVII  Kia- 86 
Kidaamaari- 88 
Kidemaar- 88 
Kīl¢la- 208  
Kilimarum-3 
Kirakanda- 167 
Kiramar- 88 
Kirambu Tailam- 212  
Kirigulia- 26 
Kitmaar- 88 
Kitmaari- 88 
K¤°am ¢r¤ - 88 
K¤t¢ri- 88 
Ko ´¢k¢´d¢- 38 
Kodi- 180 
Kodikki - 66 
Koditamarai - 70 
Koenidine - 146 
Koenigine- 146 
Koenimbine- 146 
Kolakannaru- 139 
Kolakuponna- 139 
Kolaponna- 139 
Kollamkova kizhang- 167 
Konda papata  - 122  
Kondakkadalai- 29 
Kondamamidi-3 
Kosundra- 131 
Kothuk- 182 
Kotivel- 133 
Kova - 19, 21  
Kovai - 19, 21  
Koval - 19, 21  
K¨¾´ada ´² ik ¢- 16 
Ksaudra- 214  
K¾uraka- 56 
Kuchai  -1 
Kudapayal - 70 
Kukurchuda  - 122  
Kum ¢r¤vetra - 90 
Kumaari  bettha- 90 
Kumbhik ¢- 70 
Kundamaavu-3 
Kunduri - 19, 21  
Kunduru - 19, 21  
Kunru - 19, 21  
Kupaaimeni - 63  CDLXVIII  Kuppameni- 63 
Kuppi- 63 
Kuppichettu- 63 
Kuppigida- 63 
Kuppinta- 63 
Kura ´°ik ¢- 148 
Kura ´² a- 148 
Kuradu- 148 
Kurukkathi- 106 
Kuruntotti- 51 
Kusam- 92 
Kusharta- 173 
Kusubbi– 94, 96 
Kusubeegida- 92 
Kusum- 92, 94, 96 
Kusum phool– 94, 96 
Kusuma- 92 
Kusumb– 94, 96 
Kusumbaa- 92 
Kusumbha – 92, 94, 96 
Kusumbi- 92 
Kusumbo– 92, 94, 96 
Kusumekalu- 92 
Kusumulu– 94, 96 
Kuyimpu– 92, 94, 96 
L. europeaum - 75 
Laanpadi- 148 
Labanga- 212  
Lactophenol (Amman’s Fluid) - 235 
Lactose Broth Medium – 270 
L aghu haritama ®jar ¤ - 99 
Laghu-Kupp ¤- 99 
Laghupatra var ½¢bh ¦ - 101 
Lahra- 185 
Lal chitra- 133 
Lal chitrak- 133 
Lal-chita- 133 
Lal-chitrak- 133 
Lamiaceae- 124,160, 210, 216, 226 
Lan- 212  
Land caltrops- 56 
Lasora– 152, 154 
Lasuda– 152, 154 
Latakhadira  -1 
Laung- 212  
Lauraceae- 210  
Lavang- 212  
Lavanga enne- 212   CDLXIX  Lavanga Taila - 212  
Lavangalu- 212  
Laving- 212  
Lavyaankudi- 26 
Lead - 252 
Lead nitrate stock solution- 257 
Lead wort- 133 
Leguminosae – Mimosaceae- 142 
Leptadenia reticulata W. & A.  - 73 
Levine Eosin-Methylene Blue Agar Medium 
- 270 
Light Petroleum- 322, 323 
Lignan glucoside - 93 
Lignans sesamin- 62 
Lignified elements- 238 
Liliaceae - 41,111 
Limonene – 79, 166 
Limri- 80 
Linoleic-53, 119 
Lisodaa– 152, 154 
Lohita k ¾¤r¤- 104 
Lohitaniry ¢sa - 104 
Long- 212  
Lonpadi- 148 
Lopez tree- 80 
Lucenin- 71 
Lumanika- 163 
Lupeol- 2,195 
Luteolin- 74, 109, 125, 189 
Luteolin -7- O-β glucoside - 109 
Luteolin-7-O-glucoside- 93 
Lycium barbarum  L. - 75 
M. koenigii. Spreng- 145 
M. lotoides Kuntz. - 182 
Maadhavi- 106 
Maadhavivasantadhuti- 106 
Maadhivilataa- 106 
Maakaatendu- 173 
Maaladi- 113 
Maamejvaa- 115 
Maamijvaa- 115 
MacConkey Agar Medium - 271 
MacConkey Broth Medium- 271 
Machino - 202 
Machipatri- 38 
Macrocylic diterpenes- 162 
Madagaskara plum- 163 
Madh- 214   CDLXX  M¢dhav ¤ - 106 
M¢dha ¤lata- 106 
Madhu - 214 
Madhumaalati- 106 
Madhuree- 160 
Madhvika- 214  
Madnu- 169 
Magnesium sulphate - 256 
Magnoflorine- 89 
Magnoliaceae- 171  
Mah ¢º u´² ¤- 66 
Mahadvy ¢ghr ¤- 26 
Mahanimbine- 146 
Mahu- 214  
Maiden-hair fern - 16 
Malabaric acid- 162 
Malampulvan- 135 
Malchang- 169 
Male fern- 158 
Malpighiaceae- 106 
Maltose- 93 
Malukkanniram-34, 36 
Malvaceae- 51 
M¢majjaka- 115 
Manalkirai- 187 
Mancha Kanda-5 
Mandarum- 131 
Mangarvallee - 9 
Manger- 80 
Manichidr ¢- 111 
Manjalkarilaamkanni- 83 
Mannakkannunni- 83 
Manneli- 150 
Mannitol-Salt Agar Medium- 271 
Manupasupu- 32 
Maradarisina- 32 
Maramaanja- 32 
Maranta arundinacea L. - 7 
Marantaceae- 7 
Marotti- 180 
Mastaru- 38 
Mastiyaaraa- 38 
Matairesinol- 93 
Matsy ´² ik ā- 218  
Matsyapatrik ¢ - 108 
Mattari- 185 
Mau- 214  
Mauritius plum- 163  CDLXXI  Mdhukarka °¤- 47, 49 
Me ¾a-jihv ¢- 189 
Med ¢ - 111 
Meda - 111 
Medaa - 111 
Medhaa - 111 
Meghapu ¾pa- 208  
Melon tree- 47, 49 
Mendhadhdhi-193 
Mentha - 216  
Menthol- 216  
Mercuric Chloride - 320 
Mercuric Chloride Paper- 253 
Mercuric Chloride Solution- 320 
Mercuric Chloride, 0.2 M- 320 
Mercuric Potassium Iodide Solution- 320 
Mercury- 252 
Merremia tridentata  (L.) Hall. f.  - 108 
6-methoxygenkwanin- 125  
Methyl 6- O-(E)-p -coumaroyl 
glucopyranoside- 164 
Methyl Alcohol- 320 
Methyl Alcohol, Dehydrated - 321 
Methyl cinnamate - 60 
Methyl eptenone - 53 
Methyl Orange- 321 
Methyl Orange Solution- 321 
Methyl Red- 321 
Methylene blue- 235 
tri -O-Methylwedelolactone- 84 
Milagaranai- 80 
Milagu- 80 
Millon’s reagent- 235 
Mimosa  pennata  L. -1 
Mimosaceae -1 
Minandi- 218  
Mirapagandra- 80 
Mirchiakand- 167 
Mirri- 118 
Mirrigalgoj- 118 
Mitha cherry– 43, 45 
Mitha neem- 145 
Mogali- 86 
Mogili- 86 
Molish’s Reagent- 321 
Mollugo cerviana Seringe- 54 
Mollugo hirta Thub- 182 
Mollugocin A and B- 184  CDLXXII  Mollugogenol - 184 
Monochoria vaginalis  Presl. - 68 
Monoglucoside- 93 
Monoterpenoids myrcene- 62 
Moovilai- 139 
Moraceae- 120 
Moramamsi - 12, 14  
Moshipatri- 38 
Moteveldode- 165 
Mothe elaayachi- 165 
Mothi dudhi- 23 
Mothi elichi- 165 
Mothi naayati- 23 
Moto-elachi- 165 
Moupinamide- 58 
Mubaraka - 16 
Mucilage - 238 
Muconine murrayacine- 146 
Mukkutummudu - 73 
Muktajhuri- 63 
Muktavarc ¢- 63 
Mukuta manjari- 63 
M¦laphalada- 120 
Mulappumarutu- 137 
Mullamkatti- 26 
Mullumastige- 80 
Mullumuntala- 135 
Munik- 208  
Mur ¢- 12, 14  
Mura - 12, 14  
Muramaansi - 12, 14  
Murelchonne- 139 
Muripindi- 63 
Murraya koenigii (L.) Spreng- 145                            
Murudonda- 167 
Mustard Oil- 220 
Mutiyarkunthal - 108 
Muttapayal - 70 
Myrcene- 125, 166 
Myricetin -35, 37 
Myristodilinolein- 93 
Myristone- 188 
Myristo-oleo-linolein- 93 
Myrtaceae- 212, 222  
Naadihingu- 113 
Naagdanti - 66 
Naahi Kand- 167 
Naahikand- 167  CDLXXIII  Naai- 115 
Naalla Hamsapadu - 16 
Naay- 115 
Naayato- 23 
N¢²¤hi ¬gu - 113 
N¢gajihv ¢- 115 
N¢hik ¢- 167 
N¢hikanda- 167 
Nagadonda- 167 
Nagaladudhi-193 
N¢h¤ - 115 
Nakachana- 63 
Nakkera– 152, 154 
Nalehullu- 160 
Nalennai- 224 
Nallakova - 19, 21  
Nalleru - 9 
Nallerutige - 9 
Nanubalu- 23 
Naphthaquinones- 134 
Naphthol solution- 235 
Narasingha- 145 
Narcissin- 170 
Narivilee– 152, 154 
Naruvari– 152, 154 
Naruvili– 152, 154 
Naruviri– 152, 154 
Nattarattai- 59 
Natural Camphor- 210  
Navarayilla- 124 
Neellu- 208  
Neerganjimara- 169 
Neeru- 208  
Neggilumullu- 56 
Neglu- 56 
Nei- 204 
Nela vempali- 150 
Nelapalai- 23 
Neosa pine- 118 
Neosakuranine- 46 
Neoza- 118 
Nerinzil- 56 
Nerolidol- 166 
Nerunjee- 56 
Nerunji- 56 
Netar- 191 
Neyyi- 204 
Nhana gokhru- 56  CDLXXIV  Nicotiflorin- 17 
Nikocaka - 118 
Nila- 150 
Nilagiri- 222 
Nilagiri- 222 
Nilagiri enne- 222 
Nilagiri taila- 222 
NilagiriTailam- 222 
Nilampala- 38 
Nilgiri tail- 222 
Nīra- 208  
Nirati Muthu- 180 
Niridi- 180 
Nirkanca- 68 
Nirubuduki - 70 
Nirudu- 180 
Nitric Acid - 322 
Nitric acid AsT- 253 
Nitric acid Sp. - 257 
Nitric Acid, Dilute- 322 
Nitric Acid, x N- 322 
n-Nonacosane- 136 
Nonapeptide - 149 
Norwedelic acid- 84 
Norwedelolactone- 84 
Nuranji vamu - 78 
Nutrient Agar Medium- 271 
Nutrient Broth Medium- 271 
Nuvvulanune- 224 
Ocimum kilimandscharicum Guerke- 210  
n-Octacosanol- 136  
Octadecadienoic -2 
Octadecanoic-2 
Oddalinine- 81 
Oil of wintergreen - 202 
Okharadi- 182 
Ola-kochu-5 
Oleanolic acid- 125 
Oleanolic acid- 184 
Oleic-53, 119, 153 
Oleo-dilinolein- 93, 119 
Oleum Gaultheriale - 202 
Oma - 78 
Omakki - 78 
Oman - 78 
Orientin - 55 
Orila- 139 
O¾°hopamaphal ¢- 19, 21   CDLXXV  Ovaa- 124 
Ovaapaan- 124 
Ovaa phul- 226 
Ovatodiolide- 162 
2α,3 α,19 α,23-Oxalacetic acid- 125 
Oxalic acid - 188 
7-Oxo-onocer-8-ene-3 β,21 α-diol- 10 
Oxyberberine- 33 
P. fascicularis Lamk. - 86 
P. rosea L. - 133 
P. spicatum  Roem and Schult- 185   
P. spicigera  L. - 142 
P. tectorius Soland. ex Parkinson- 86 
P. tomentosa Roxb.  - 122  
P. typhoideum  Rich. - 185 
Paan- 124 
Paani- 208  
Paani- 208  
Paanicikaa- 173 
Paaniri- 88 
Paatalai Kayyaantakarai- 83 
Paatharchur- 124 
Paavatlegida  - 122  
Paccha guntagalijeru- 83 
Pacchare- 131 
Pada- 54 
Pala- 120 
P¢lanik ¢- 175  
Palagunda- 7 
Palalkkodi - 73 
Palatige - 73 
Palisade Ratio -240 
Palleru- 56 
Palmatine- 33 
Palmitic – 53, 119, 153 
Palmitic and pentadecanoic acids-2 
Palmito-dilinolein- 93, 119 
Palmito-oleolinolein- 93, 119 
Panachchi- 173 
Panachi- 173 
Panampuvatti- 163 
Pananchi- 173 
Panasa - 120 
Panchadhara- 218  
Panchasara- 218  
Panckirai- 187 
Pandanaceae- 86 
Pandanus odoratissimus Roxb. - 86  CDLXXVI  Pandra veda muska- 169 
Pani- 208  
Panikkurukka- 124 
P¢nīya- 208 
Pankharaaj- 158 
Pannaikkeerai- 148 
Panumbus- 163 
Papaayaa- 47, 49 
Papadi  - 122  
P¢pa ²¤ - 122  
Papai- 47, 49 
Papain - 48 
Papaiyu- 47, 49 
Papari  - 122  
Papat  - 122  
P¢pa °aª - 122  
Papata kammi  - 122  
Papaya- 47, 49 
Papeyaa- 47, 49 
Papita- 47, 49 
Papitaa- 47, 49 
Pappaay- 47, 49 
Pappadi  - 122  
Pappali- 47, 49 
Pappar mulli- 26 
Pappiyaa- 47, 49 
P¢rasika tagara- 129 
Par ´ayav ¢n¤ - 124 
Parampu- 142 
Paringi- 47, 49 
Parpadangam- 54 
Parpataka- 54 
Parpatakamu- 54 
Parpatakapullu- 54 
Parrot seed- 92 
Parsiaoshan - 16 
Pasu Nei- 204 
Pasu Ney- 204 
Paterchur- 124 
P¢tha- 208 
Patharchura- 124 
Patrasaki- 63 
Patrasnuh £ - 127 
Patta  Karie- 127 
Pattaajvaayana- 124 
Patterns & Reeders indicators 0.1per cent  
solution - 323  CDLXXVII  P¢vaka – 94, 96 
P¢vakam - 92 
Pavati  - 122  
Pavatta  - 122  
Pavattai  - 122  
Pavetta indica  var. tomentosa  Hook. - 122  
Pavonene- 53 
Pavonenol- 53 
Pavonia odorata  Willd. - 51 
Pawpaw- 47, 49 
Paya- 208  
Pearl millet- 185 
Pectin- 81 
Pedaliaceae- 224 
Pedda elakulu- 165 
Peddayelaki- 165 
Pedunculol - 197 
Pelargonidin-3-sophorsido-7-glucoside- 184 
Pemu- 191 
Penduletin- 62 
Pennisetum typhoides  (Burm.) Stapf& C.E. 
Hubb- 185 
Penova- 124 
1-Pentadecene - 95 
Pentylbenzene- 79 
Peppermin °- Satva - 216  
Peramutti- 51 
Perelam- 165 
Pergularia daemia (Forsskal) Choiv.- 193 
Peri-elav- 165 
Periya elam- 165 
Persimon- 173 
Perundumbai- 160 
Petroleum  Light- 322 
pH 2.5 wash solution- 260 
Phanas- 120 
Phanasa- 120 
Phanus- 120 
β-Phellandrene- 39 
Phenolphthalein- 323 
Phenolphthalein Solution- 323 
Phenolpthalein indicator- 323 
Phenylanine- 37 
Phloroglucinol- 323 
Pholorglucinol- 235 
Phosphoric Acid- 323 
Phosphoric Acid, Dilute - 324 
Phosphoric Acid, x N- 323  CDLXXVIII  Physcion - 87 
Pi´² atagara - 129 
Picchila loma ºaª- 51 
Picric acid solution (Trinitrophenol 
Solution) - 235 
Pilaabhangraa- 83 
α-Pinene – 39, 53, 79, 125, 166 
β-Pinene- 39, 79, 125, 166 
Piperidine- 87 
Pipermint- 216  
Pirampu- 191 
Pirandai - 9 
Pirangi- 47, 49 
Piranta - 9 
Pistia stratiotes L.  - 70 
Pitabh ¨¬ gar ¢ja- 83 
P¤ta-k¢® can ¢ra - 131 
P¤tapu ¾paka ª- 131 
Pitikarunai - 156 
Pitta Sag- 54 
Plantaginaceae- 189 
Plantaginin- 189 
Plantago lanceolata  L. - 189 
Plavu - 16 
Plumbagic acid- 134 
Plumbaginaceae- 133 
Plumbago indica  L. - 133 
Poaceae (Graminae) – 185, 206 
Polygonatum cirrhifolium  Royle - 111 
Polypodiaceae - 16 
Pomolic acid- 125 
Ponoso- 120 
Pontederia vaginalis  Burm.f- 68 
Pontederiaceae- 68 
Poospala- 145 
Populnin- 31 
Potable Water- 208 
Potadontari  -1 
Potash, Caustic- 235 
Potassium chlorate AsT - 254 
Potassium Chloride - 324 
Potassium Chromate- 324 
Potassium Chromate Solution- 324 
Potassium Cupric-Tartrate Solution- 324 
Potassium cyanide solution Sp. - 260 
Potassium cyanide solution Sp.- 257 
Potassium Dichromate- 324  CDLXXIX  Potassium Dichromate Solution- 324 
Potassium Dichromate, Solution 0.1N- 324 
Potassium Dihydrogen Phosphate - 325 
Potassium Ferrocyanide - 325 
Potassium Ferrocyanide Solution- 325 
Potassium Hydrogen Phthalate- 325 
Potassium Hydrogen Phthalate, 0.02 M- 325 
Potassium Hydrogen Phthalate, 0.2 M- 325 
Potassium Hydroxide- 325 
Potassium Hydroxide Solution - 326 
Potassium Hydroxide, x N - 326 
Potassium iodide - 256 
Potassium Iodide - 326 
Potassium Iodide and Starch Solution- 327 
Potassium iodide AsT- 254 
Potassium Iodide Solution - 327 
Potassium Iodide, M – 327 
Potassium Iodobismuthate Solution - 327 
Potassium Iodobismuthate Solution, Dilute - 
327 
Potassium Mercuric-Iodide Solution - 327 
Potassium Mercuric-Iodide Solution, 
Alkaline (Nessler’s Reagent) - 327 
Potassium Permanganate - 327 
Potassium Permanganate Solution - 328 
Potassium Permanganate, 0.1 N Solution - 
328 
Potassium Tellurite - 328 
Pras ¢rin ¤ Keral ¤ya - 108 
Prasni - 70 
Procyandin- 37 
Prosopis cineraria  Druce- 142 
Protein Estimation - 251 
Protensein- 31 
Protium caudatum  W. & A. -3 
Protodioscin saponin C- 58 
Protodiscin saponin C- 28 
Prototribestin- 58 
Prunasin- 44, 46 
Prunus avium L. – 43, 45 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa  - 278 
Pseudomonas Agar Medium for Detection 
of Flourescein - 272 
Pseudomonas Agar Medium for Detection 
of Pyocyanin- 272 
Pterocarpan- 140 
Pu ¾kara- 208  
Pulivanchi- 196 
Pulladi- 139  CDLXXX  Pullaprabbali- 196 
Puncture vine- 56 
Purified Water - 328 
Puruni saga- 101 
Pushwari - 12, 14  
Pusparasa- 214  
Puspasava- 214  
Putikatada- 163 
Putiri chunda- 26 
Putregu- 163 
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids - 67 
Qarnful- 212  
Quercetin- 17, 31, 35, 76, 125, 132 
Quercetin-3-gentiobioside-7-glucoside- 58 
Quinic acid- 37 
Quinine- 65 
Quinones - 134 
Qurtum- 92 
Raalchaavriksha- 137 
Raffinose- 93 
Ragatpiti- 106 
Raja ªpu ¾pa- 86 
Rakta Citraka - 133 
Rakta-chita- 133 
Raktaphal ¢- 19, 21  
Rakto chita- 133 
Randhuni - 78 
Ranga  agyachit- 133 
Rangachitaparu- 133 
Rasi tel- 224 
Rato-chatro- 133 
Reddivarinanubalu- 23 
Resin- 81, 102 
Resorcinol solution - 329 
Rhee- 118 
Rhyncocarpa epigaea Naud- 167 
Ribwort- 189 
Ringani- 26 
Riyaahi Kapphur- 210  
Roda rayana- 135 
Rogan- dalachini- 200 
Rogan Eucalyptus- 222 
Rogana Sarsafa- 220 
Rogana taila- 224 
Roheda- 135 
Rohida- 135 
Rohido- 135 
Rohira- 135  CDLXXXI  Rohitaka - 135 
Rohituka tree- 135 
Roma ºara- 191 
Rosaceae– 43, 45 
Rosy flowered lead wort- 133 
Rubiaceae   113, 122  
Rukuna- 129 
Rung- 212  
Rutaceae- 80 
Ruthenium red- 235 
Rutin- 17,76,170 
S. indicum  L. - 26 
Saakhu- 137 
Saal- 137 
Saalam- 137 
Saalapaani- 139 
Saalvan- 139 
Saalvriksham- 137 
Saasive- 220  
Saasve- 220  
Sabar- 127 
Sabinene - 166 
Sabinyl acetate- 39 
Sabouraud Dextrose Agar Medium- 272 
Sabouraud Dextrose Agar Medium with 
Antibiotics- 272 
Saccharopine- 42 
Saccharum officinarum L. -206 
S-acetyl dihydroasparagusic acid- 42 
Sada Kanchana- 131 
Safed Kulanjana- 59 
Safflower– 92, 94, 96 
Safranin- 235 
Sahad- 214  
Sain- 142 
Sajja- 185 
Sajjai- 185 
Sajjalu- 185 
Sakalapriya- 29 
¹¢ka ºre ¾tªa- 73 
Sakhara- 218  
Sakhuaa- 137 
Sakkara- 218  
Sakkare- 218  
Saktuphala- 142 
Sala- 137 
¹¢ la - 137 
¹¢lapar ´¤ - 139   CDLXXXII  Salicaceae- 169 
Salicin- 170 
Salicortin- 170 
Salila- 208  
Salira- 208  
Salix alba  L- 169 
Salka par ´¢¬ga- 158  
¹am £ - 142 
Salmonella - 278 
Saloparnni- 139 
Salpan- 139 
Salpatri- 139 
Saltree- 137 
Salva- 137 
Salvingenin- 125 
Sameravo- 139 
Sami- 142 
Sangalu- 29 
¹a¬kuphalik ¢- 142 
Sanna Bettamu- 191 
Saponarin- 116 
Saponin glycosides - 42 
Saponins- 35, 102, 186, 192 
Sarakhsa- 158 
Sarasiya Tail- 220  
Sarate- 56 
Sariah- 220  
Sarishaa- 220  
Sarivan- 139 
Śarkar ā - 218  
Sarkara -206 
Sarkkarai- 218  
Sarpih- 204 
Sar ¾apa Taila - 220 
Sarsasapogenin glycoside- 42 
Sarso ka Saka- 220  
Sarvan- 139 
Sat-ajavayan- 226 
Saunder- 142 
Saurabhanimba - 145 
Savolikkoti - 108 
Schultze’s Maceration fluid- 235 
Screwpine- 86 
Scutellarin- 189 
Sebesten– 152, 154 
Sehu ´² a- 127 
Selenite F Broth- 272 
Selinidin- 15  CDLXXXIII  β-Selinen- 79 
β-Salinene- 125 
Selinum vaginatum C.B. Clarke - 12, 14  
¹elu– 152, 154  
Sendurakam- 92 
Senturakam- 92 
Senturkam– 94, 96 
Serpana- 38 
Sesamum indicum L. - 224 
Sesamum Oil- 224 
Sesquiterpene lactones - 62 
Shaakar- 218  
Shaal tree- 137 
Shaalgaach- 137 
Shaaluaagachha- 137 
Shaalvriksh- 137 
Shaalvriksh- 137 
Shala- 137 
Shalpaani- 139 
Shalpurni- 139 
Shalwan- 139 
Shami- 142 
Shevanti - 61 
Shikimic acid- 37 
Shirsiche Taila- 220  
Shiva-malli- 150 
Shiva-nimba- 150 
Shorea robusta Gaertn. - 137 
Shoreaphenol- 138 
Shushunishaak- 148 
Siali-193 
Siguri  -1 
Sij- 127 
Sikt ¢- 218  
α-Silenene- 62 
Silver Nitrate Solution - 329 
Silver Nitrate, 0.1 N - 329 
Silver spiked cock’s comb- 148 
Si ¼hik ¢- 26 
Simlu- 32 
Sinni-maram- 99 
¹ira ªº¦lakar ¤- 38 
Siravaari- 148 
Siriportlagida- 189 
Siriv ¢lik ¢- 148 
Siriyaari- 148 
Sit ¢- 218   CDLXXXIV  Sitaampu- 106 
Sitak ¢´da- 75 
¹itašiva- 210 
Sitas ¦ra ´a-5 
Sitasavaram - 108 
Sita tavak ¾¤ra- 7 
¹itav ¢ra- 148 
Sitiv ¢ra- 148 
¹itiv ¢raka - 148 
β-sitosterol-2, 10, 17, 20, 22, 42, 53, 73, 87, 
89, 93, 121, 136, 153, 155, 157, 162, 174  
Sitosterol glucoside- 125 
β-Sitosterol glucoside – 174, 184 
γ- Sitosterol glucosides- 184 
Sivanar vayambu- 150 
Sivanarvembu- 150 
¹iva-n£l£ - 150 
Skimmianine- 81 
¹le ¾m¢taka – 152, 154 
¹l¤pad ¢rikanda - 156 
Sodium bicarbonate - 256 
Sodium Bicarbonate - 329 
Sodium Bicarbonate Solution - 330 
Sodium Carbonate- 330 
Sodium carbonate, anhydrous AsT- 254 
Sodium Chloride- 330 
Sodium Chloride Solution – 288, 330 
Sodium hydroxide – 256, 330 
Sodium  Hydroxide  Solution- 331 
Sodium  Hydroxide  Solution , Dilute- 331 
Sodium Hydroxide, x N - 331 
Sodium Potassium Tartrate- 331 
Sodium Salicylate- 254 
Sodium Sulphate (anhydrous) - 332 
Sodium Thiosulphate- 332 
Sodium Thiosulphate, 0.1 N- 332 
Sogade- 115 
Solafuranone- 28 
Solanaceae- 26, 75 
Solanum anguivi Lam. - 26 
Somanaadikaayam- 113 
¹onitavar ´¢- 104 
Sorisha Tela- 220  
Sottaikala- 163 
Soxhlet Modification of Fehling’s solution -
333 
Sperage - 41  CDLXXXV  Sph ¦rjaka- 173 
Sph ¤tak ¤°¢ r¤ - 158 
Spiked millet- 185 
α-Spinasterol-2 
Spirostanol glucoside- 42 
Sprk- 160 
Sp ¨kk ¢ - 160 
Spunge tree- 142 
¹rihastini - 66 
Sripras ¦na- 212  
¹r¤v¢raka- 148 
¹¨¬gapu ¾p¤- 88 
Sruvav ¨k¾a - 163 
Standard dithizone solution - 260 
Standard Invert Sugar Solution-333 
Standard lead solution- 257 
Standard Stains - 255 
Stannated hydrochloric acid AsT- 254 
Stannous Chloride solution AsT- 254 
Stannous Chloride Solution-333 
Stannous Chloride-333 
Staphylococcus aureus  - 279 
Star Anise of China- 171  
Starch - 237 
Starch Estimation - 248 
Starch Soluble - 333 
Starch Solution - 334 
Stearic -53, 119, 153 
Stearo-dilinolein- 93, 119 
Stearo-oleolinolein- 93, 119 
Steroid glucosides- 42 
Steroid glycosides - 178 
Steroidal saponins – 28, 58, 112 
Sterols- 65, 159 
Sth ¦lail ¢ - 165 
Sthir ¢- 139 
Stigmast-4-en-3,6-dione- 87 
Stigmasterol- 17, 74, 87 
∆7 –Stigmasterol- 93 
Stigmasterol 3-O-beta-D-glucopyranoside - 
69 
Stomatal Index - 240 
Stomatal Number - 242 
Subhra- 218  
Succinic acid- 188 
S¦cigucch ¢- 41 
S¦cipu ¾pa- 86  CDLXXXVI  Sucrose - 341 
Sudan Red III- 235 
Sugandh ¢- 160 
Sugandha-bala- 51 
Sugandhapatra taila- 222 
Sugandhi bach- 59 
Sugandhidru- 38 
Sugar- 218  
Sugar Estimation - 248 
¹ukan ¢s¢ - 167 
Sukla- 218  
Sulfuretin- 184 
Sulphamic Acid- 334 
Sulphate esters of 1-coumarylglucose- 17 
Sulphovanadic acid (Mandelin’s reagent) - 
235 
Sulphur dioxide - 338 
Sulphuric acid + orthophosphoric acid 
mixture - 334 
Sulphuric Acid- 334 
Sulphuric acid AsT- 254 
Sulphuric acid Sp. - 257 
Sulphuric Acid, Chlorine-free- 334 
Sulphuric Acid, Nitrogen-free- 334 
Sumlu- 32 
Surabhinimba- 145 
Surali- 148 
Suranti- 180 
Suravaali- 148 
Suravaali- 148 
Suravaali- 148 
Sushunimaak- 148 
Su ¾ira k ¢´² aª- 90 
Sutr ¢grapatr ¢- 111 
¹vada ¼¾tr¢- 56 
Sv ¢duka ´°aka- 56 
¹vetakula ®jana- 59 
Sveta veda muska- 169 
¹veta veda mu ºka- 169 
¹veta vetasa - 169  
Sweet Cherry– 43, 45 
Swertiamarin- 116 
Swertisin- 116 
Sylswertisin-5- O-glucoside- 116 
Sylswertisioside- 116 
Synantherias sylvatica  Schott Gen. Aocja  -5 
Syzygium aromaticum  Merril & Perry- 212  
Taalampu- 86  CDLXXXVII  Tagar ganthoda- 129 
Taila - 224 
Tailapar ´a Taila - 222 
Tailaparna- 222 
Taja taila- 200 
Takkola - 171 
Takkolpputtil- 171  
Tal taila- 224 
Talai- 86 
Talaneeli - 108 
Tambu- 142 
Tannin – 186, 238 
Tannin rich foliage – 143 
Tannir- 208  
Tanu tvak taila- 200 
Taraxerol- 10 
Tartaric Acid - 335 
Tartaric acid- 188 
Taur- 131 
Tavakira- 7 
Taxifolin- 125 
Tazampu- 86 
Tazha- 86 
Tazhai- 86 
Tecomella undulata  (Sm.) Seem. - 135 
Tecomin (veratroyl β-D-glucoside) - 136 
Tectochrysin- 46 
Tejana- 191 
Tekkit - 66 
Tela Kuccha - 19, 21  
Telkkat - 66 
Telkodukkai - 66   
Tella iswari- 88 
Tella mulaka- 26 
Tellagalijeru- 101 
Tellamanga- 113 
Temburni- 173 
Temru- 173 
Ten- 214  
Tendu- 173 
Tepari- 127 
Terkkat - 66 
α-Terpinene- 166 
β-Terpinene- 166  
γ-Terpinene- 125 
Terpinenol- 166 
α-Terpineol- 166 
δ-Terpineol- 166   CDLXXXVIII  Terreside A and B- 58 
Terrestriamide - 58 
Terrestroneoside- 58 
Terrestroside F- 58 
Terrestrosin- 58 
Terrestrosin J- 58 
Tetracosanol- 188 
Tetrahydropalmitine- 33 
Tetrathionate Broth Medium- 273 
Tetrathionate-Bile-Brilliant Green Broth 
Medium- 273 
Thaale hou- 86 
Thaikal- 196 
The Greater Cardamom- 165 
Then- 214  
Thën- 214  
Thioglycollic Acid- 335 
Thor- 127 
Thor veta- 191 
Thorkantalo- 127 
Thujone- 39 
Thymol- 125, 226 
Thymus vulgaris  L. - 226 
Tidbaghuri- 26 
Tidbhagnri- 26 
Tikka malli- 113 
Tikul- 196 
Tikur- 196 
Til taila- 224 
Tila tail- 224 
Tila Taila - 224 
Tilataila- 224 
Tilli taila- 224 
Timbaravo- 173 
Tindoran - 19, 21  
Tinduka - 173 
Tirunitripachcha- 38 
Titaveen- 38 
T-murolol- 62 
Toddalia aculeata  Pers. - 80 
Toddalia asiatica (L.) Lam. - 80 
Toddaline - 81 
Tokaapaanaa - 70 
Toluene- 335 
Tonde balli - 19, 21  
Tondlee - 19, 21  
Toop- 204 
Toratti- 180 
Tormentic acid- 125  CDLXXXIX  Toroni- 59 
Total reducing sugars - 340 
Toya- 208  
Tr ¢yam ¢´¢ - 175  
Tr ¢yanti - 175  
Tr ¢yantik ¢- 175  
Trachyspermum ammi  (L.) Sprague- 226 
Trailing coldenia - 177  
Trayama - 175  
Trayamana - 175  
Trayman - 175  
Traymana - 175  
Triacontane– 20, 22, 188 
n-Triacontane- 136 
n-Triacontanol- 87,136  
Trianthema decandra  L. - 101 
Tribulosaponin A and B- 58 
Tribulosin- 58 
Tribulus terrestris L. - 56 
Tribulusamide A- 58 
Triethanolamine 20per cent Solution- 335 
Trika ´°aka- 56 
Trilinolein- 93 
Triolein - 119 
Tripak ¾¤ - 177  
Tripakshi - 177  
Tripar ´¤- 139 
Triple Sugar-Iron Agar Medium- 273 
Tripu ¼kh ¤- 177  
Tripunkhi - 177  
Triterpenic acid - 162 
Triterpenoids – 10, 24, 162, 174, 195 
T¨´ aº¦nya- 86 
Tultuli- 101 
Tumbi- 173 
Tumbika- 173 
Tumiki- 173 
Tundpora- 80 
Tu ´²¤- 19, 21  
Tu ¬ga - 142 
Tuppa - 204 
Tuvaraka - 180 
Tvak taila- 200 
Typhonium trilobatum Schott- 156 
Ubhi ringni- 26 
Ubhimo ringni- 26  CDXC  Udaka- 208  
Unicha- 163 
Upana- 129 
Urea Broth Medium - 274 
Ursolic acid- 125 
¥½and £ - 182 
U¾´ asundara- 54  
Utaran-193 
Utarana-193 
Utruli-193 
Uttamani-193 
Uttamarani-193 
Uzarigenin- 195 
Vaaluchi-bhaaji- 187 
Vaamu satva- 226 
Vadagunda - 154 
Vadh ¦- 160 
Vaginatin - 15 
Vaginidin- 15 
Vaginol- 15 
Vahillic acid- 134 
Vahni- 142 
Vahni ºikham- 92 
Vaincha- 163 
V¢jimantha- 29 
Vajr ¢nna - 185 
Vajr ¤- 127 
Vajrakanda-5 
Vajravall ¤- 9 
Valiya chural- 90 
Valiya elam- 165 
Valjawain - 78 
Valuka- 187 
V¢luk ¢- 187 
V¢luka– 43, 45 
V¢luk ¢-¹¢ ka - 187 
Vamu-aku- 124 
Vanasurana-5 
Vanav ¨nt ¢ka- 26 
Vanbhantaa- 26 
Vanchi- 90 
Vanchi Kanto- 63 
Vanni- 142 
Vanya-a¹vagola - 189 
Vanya-i¾adgola- 189 
V¢ri- 208 
V¢ripar ´¤- 70  CDXCI  Var ¾h¢mbu- 208  
Varu ´am- 208  
Vastrara ®jana– 94, 96 
Vastrarañjana- 92 
Vavankataku- 163 
Vein-Islet Number - 241 
Veliparuthi-193 
Velipparuthi-193 
Vellai caranai- 101 
Vellam-206, 208 
Vellanagai-34, 36 
Vellanamai-34, 36 
Vellanava-34, 36 
Vellari- 115 
Vellaruku- 115 
Vellutha thazhuthama- 101 
Veranisatins – 172  
Vet- 191 
Veta- 90,191 
Vetra - 191 
Vetraka- 191 
Vicenin - 71 
Vicenin 2- 184 
Vid ¢rigandh ¢- 139 
Vika ¬kata- 163 
Vikamkath- 163 
Vikankata- 163 
Vilayati afsantin- 38 
Viral ¢- 173 
Visanika - 193 
Vitaceae - 9 
Vitexin- 55, 184 
Vogel-Johnson Agar Medium - 274 
Volatile fatty acid - 143 
Vrikshamroti- 180 
V¨nt ¢mlaphala - 196 
V¨¹cikakanda - 198 
Vruvalu- 38 
Vyaakud- 26 
Water- 208, 335  
Water lettuce - 70 
Water, Ammonia-free- 335 
Wedelia calendulacea  Less- 83 
Wedelia chinensis  Merril- 83 
West Indian Arrowroot- 7 
White Pavetta  - 122  
White willow- 169 
Wild orange tree- 80  CDXCII  Wiry indigo- 150 
Wollelu- 224 
Worm wood- 38 
Xylenol Orange- 335 
Xylenol Orange Solution- 335 
Xylose-Lysine-Desoxycholate Agar 
Medium - 274 
Yaliya nzerinigal- 163 
Yamaani sattva- 226 
Yamani - 78 
Yam āni ghanasara- 226 
Yav ¢n¤gandh ¢- 124 
Yav ¢nī satva - 226 
Yavaan sara- 226 
Yela kalli- 127 
Yugmaphata-193 
Yukeliptus- 222 
Zakum- 127 
Zarishk- 32 
Zarishka- 32 
Zeylanone- 134 
Zinc Acetate – Aluminum Chloride Reagent 
- 288 
Zinc Acetate – Aluminum Chloride 
Reagent- 335 
Zinc Acetate- 335 
Zinc acetate solution 0.05M- 335 
Zinc AsT- 254 
Zingiberaceae- 59, 165 
Zygophyllaceae- 56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
THE AYURVEDIC PHARMACOPOEIA  
OF INDIA  THE  
AYURVEDIC  
PHARMACOPOEIA  
OF  
INDIA  
 
PART - I  
VOLUME - VII 
(MINERALS & METALS)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE  
DEPARTMENT OF AYURVEDA, YOGA & NATUROPATHY, UNANI, 
SIDDHA AND HOMOEOPATHY,  
NEW DELHI  
2008   First Edition   
PDH.66. Part I, Vol VI I 
5000- 2008 (DSK  II) 
  
 ©2008, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
Government of India  
Department of Ayurveda, Yoga – Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha & Homeopathy (AYUSH)  
   
Effective from 1
st January, 2009 
 
  Price    :  Inland   Rs. 500/ - 
      Foreign  US $ 100/ - 
 
 
ISBN    :  978-81-905952- 2-3 
 
 Published by   :  THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS  
      CIVIL LINES, DELHI -  110054 
        
On Behalf of    :  GOVERNMENT OF INDIA  
DEPARTMENT OF AYURVEDA, YOGA-NATUROPATHY, UNANI, SIDDHA AND HOMOEOPATHY (AYUSH), INDIAN RED CROSS SOCIETY BUILDING, SANSAD MARG, NEW DELHI  
 WEBSITE   :   
www.indianmedicine.nic.in  
  Printed at             :   Cirrus Graphics Pvt. Ltd, Ne w Delhi   Foreword  CONTENTS  
 
  PAGE  
LEGAL NOTICES   X 
GENERAL NOTICES   XI 
PREFACE   XVII  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT   XX 
INTRODUCTION   XXI 
SPECIAL  INTRODUCTION  XXVII  
|ÉºiÉÉ´ÉxÉÉ  XXXIII  
 
MONOGRAPHS  
  
1.  Abhraka   1 
2.  Akīka  3 
3.  Gairika   5 
4.  Gandhaka   8 
5.  Godantī  11 
6.  Gomeda   13 
7.  Jaharamohar ā  15 
8.  Kānta Lauha   17 
9.  Kāśīśa  19 
10.  Kha°ikā  22 
11.  Ma´²¦ra  25 
12.  Rajata   27 
13.  Sāmudra Lava ´a  29 
14.  Sauvirā®jana  31 
15.  Svar´a  34 
16.  Svar´amāk¾ika  36 
17.  Svar´amāk¾ika Sāndrita   38 
18.  Tāmra  40 
19.  ¯a¬ka´a  42 
20.  Tuttha   45 
21.  Vaikrānta  48 
 
 
 
APPENDIX - 1. Physical Properties of Minerals and Metals 
(Definitions of Geological Terminology and Methods 
of Determination of V arious P arameters)  
 51 
1.1. Nature    53 
1.1.1  State of Aggregation  53 1.1.2  Crystal Habit  53 
1.2. Colour  54 
1.3. Streak  54 
1.4. Cleavage  55 
1.5. Fracture  55 
1.6. Lustre   56 
1.7. Tenacity  57 
1.8. Light Transmission (Transparency)  57 
1.9. Magnetism  58 
1.10.  Hardness  58 
1.11.  Specific Gravity (Density ) 60 
1.12. Fluorescence  60 
1.13. XRD Analysis  
 
 61 
APPENDIX -2. Optical Properties of Minerals and Metals 
(Definitions and M ethods of D etermination)    
 63 
2.1. Apparatus  65 
2.2.   Reagents  65 
2.3.   Mixtures  65 
2.4.   Refractive   Index  (R.I)  66 
2.4.1.   Definition  66 
2.4.2.  Principle  66 
2.4.3.  Meth od of Determination of R.I.  66 
2.5.  Method of Determination of Other Constants  
 
 67 
APPENDIX - 3. Chemical Properties of Minerals and Metals 
(Description of V arious M ethods of Chemical 
Analysis and Other S tudies)  
 71 
3.1. Chemical analysis of rock/ore samples by Classical Methods 
(Gravimetric- Wet Analysis)  
        73 
3.1.1.  Preparation of powdered sample  73 
3.1.2.  Determination of Loss on  Ignition (LOI)  73 
3.1.3 . Determination of Silica (SiO 2) 73 
3.1.4.  Determination of Iron (Fe)  74 
3.1.5.  Determin ation of Calcium Oxide (CaO -EDTA) - complex ometric 
method 75 
3.1.6.  Determination of Magnesium Oxide (MgO -EDTA) - 
complexometric  method  75 
3.1.7.  Determination of Alumina (Al 2O3-EDTA complexometric method)  76 3.1.8. Determination of Sulphur  (total) - (Grav imetric method)  77 
3.1.9.  Determination of Lead, Zinc and Copper  (complexometric method)  77 
3.1.9.i. Determination of Lead  78 
3.1.9.ii. Determination of Zinc  78 
3.1.9.iii. Determination of Copper  79 
3.1.1 0. Determination of Chloride in Sodium Chlori de (Common Salt)  
 
 79 
3.2. Chemical analysis of rock/ore samples by Instrumental Method s 
 80 
3.2.1.  Determination of Silver by Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy 
(A.A.S.)  80 
3.2.2.  Determination of Copper, Lead, Zinc, Nickel, Cobalt and Cadmium 
by A.A.S.  80 
3.2.3.  Determination of Tin by A.A.S.  81 
3.2.4.  Determination of Antimony by A.A.S.  81 
3.2.5.  Determination of Bismuth by A.A.S.  82 
3.2.6.  Determination of Gold by A.A.S.  82 
3.2.7.  Determination of Chromium by A.A.S.  83 
3.2.8.  Determination of Ars enic (Gutzeit method)  83 
3.2.9.  Determination of Mercury by cold vapour Atomic Absorption 
Spectrophotometer (Mercury Analy zer) 84 
3.2.10.  Determination of Gold and Silver by XRF (X -Ray Fluorescence 
Spectrometry)  85 
3.2.11. Determination of small amount  of Titanium (TiO 2) by 
Spectrophotometric method 85 
3.2.12. Determination of Manganese (MnO) by Spectrophotometric method  86 
3.2.13. Estimation of Na 2O and K 2O by Flame Photometry  87 
3.2.14. Determination of Boron by ICPA  
 87 
3.3. Methods of determinati on of other important chemical 
components  
 87 
3.3.1 . Determination of Acid - Insoluble  87 
3.3.2. Reaction with Hydrochloric Acid, Nitric Acid and Sulphuric Acid  87 
3.3.3. Effect of Heat  88 
3.3.4. Qualitative test for Carbonate and Sulphate  
 88 
3.4. Qualitative chemical tests of minerals by Blow Pipe Method  
 88 
3.4.1.  Essence and potentialities of the method  88 
3.4.2.  Structure of candle flame  89 
3.4.3.  Flame colourations  90 
3.4.4. Charcoal Tests  90 3.4.5.   Closed Tube and Open Tube Tests  91 
3.4.5.i Closed Tube Test  91 
3.4.5.ii Open Tube Test  91 
3.4.6. Colour Reactions with Fluxes  91 
3.4.7.   Recommended Procedure of Blowpipe Tests  
 
 92 
APPENDIX - 4. Chemicals and Reagents  
 95 
APPENDIX - 5. Classical   Ayurvedic References  
 123 
APPENDIX - 6. Bibliography  
 141 
APPENDIX - 7. Coloured Photographs of Raw Drugs  147 
 
  
 
  X LEGAL NOTICES  
In India , there are laws dealing with drugs that are the subject of monographs which 
follow. These monographs should be read subject to the restrictions imposed by these laws 
wherever they are applicable.  
 
 It is expedient that enquiry be mad e in each case in order to ensure that the provisions 
of the law are being complied with.  
  In general, the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 (subsequently amended in 1964 and 
1982), the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 and the Poisons Act, 1919 and the rules framed th ere 
under  should be consulted. 
  Under the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, the Ayur vedic Pharmacopoeia of India (A PI),   
Part-I, Vol. V II, is the book of standards for Single Drugs of Mineral s, Metals  and Marine 
origin  included therein and the standards prescribed in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, 
Part-I, Vol. VII, would be official.  If considered necessary , these standards can be amended 
and the Chairman of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee authorized to issue such 
amendments.  Whenever such amendments are issued , the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, 
Part-I, Vol. VI I, would be deemed to have been amended accordingly.   XI GENERAL NOTICES  
 
 These General Notices provide basic guidelines to help, interpret the provisions and 
terms used in this volume, in connection with the implementation of the recommended 
standards and methods of tests prescribed therein. In addition, they also include the features of a monograph that are mandatory standards.  
 Title: The title of this book is "Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, Part-I, Vol.VII  (Minerals 
and Metals)". Monographs on twenty -one raw drugs (minerals  / metals  / ores) are included in 
this volume.  
 Monograph : Each Monograph carries prescribed mandatory standards and general 
information, including those from Ayurvedic  Classics. The Monographs are arranged in the 
English alphabetical order, based on the main Samskŗta official name.  
 Monograph Title : The title given on top of each monograph indicates the name of the  
material  in Samskŗta , and is the same as mentioned in the single drugs list on the Ayurvedic 
Formularies for Minerals, Metal s and Ores. It is the " Official Name " along with synonyms in 
Samskŗta . This is followed by a scientific nomenclature in English that is nearest and most 
appropriate to the article described, and is also " Official".  
 Synonyms : Taking into account the multilingual nature of the country, other names of the 
drug have been listed in Indian languages other than Samskŗta  as far as these are available. 
The Urdu and Tamil equivalents, however, are those appearing for the same drug  in their 
respective Formularies.  
 Broad Classification: The raw materials obtained from the earth's crust and used in the indigenous systems of medicines are of great complexity, being a mixture of various elements, compounds and gangue  (waste rock i.e. the non- metalliferous part of an ore, not 
useful for the i ntended purpose). They may be chemically classified only in a broad sense, and 
exact chemical nomenclature cannot be assigned. Therefore, a broad classification, such as Silicate, Sulphide, Oxide and Metal etc. , is added for  basic information.  
    
Origin and occurrence: The nature and forms in which a raw drug occurs in the earth's  crust 
and its association with other minerals and rocks are included to give an idea about geology of the substance. The occurrence and availability of the article in India are  also incorporated . 
This important information reflects the commercial potential of the article as a source for the drug required by the Ayurvedic, Siddha & Unani practitioners, and to the manufacturers.  
 
Standards:  For mandatory purposes, the statements m ade under the following headings in a 
monograph shall constitute " Official Standards ", ........Title, Definition, Identification 
(Physical, Optical and Chemical properties), Tests and Assays, Distinction from substitutes and adulterants, Heavy metals, and t he "Śodhana" process described and recommended in 
classics quoted in Appendix - 5.  XII Physical Properties:  These include nature, colour, streak, cleavage, fracture, lustre, tenacity, 
transparency, hardness, specific gravity, taste and magnetism. These are reli able and easy 
identification features for minerals and metals. Fluorescence and XRD analysis applied for 
identification of a few articles have also been included. Physical properties serve as the preliminary but powerful parameters for identification of ra w drugs. Definitions of geological 
terminology used in the monographs and methods of determination of various parameters are given in Appendix -1.  
 Optical Properties: These include the application of optical crystallography in identification of minerals that are crystalline and transparent, irrespective of their chemical composition.  
This is a time -tested petrographic/ mineralogical method of analysis using thin sections of 
mineral or ore samples, but adapted and applied to powdered materials to suit pharm acopoeial 
requirement. Several parameters can be computed from only a few fragments using immersion liquids of known Refractive Indices, by a method known as the 'Immersion Method' . Description of the principle and the method of determination of various constants 
are given in detail in Appendix -2.  
 Chemical Properties:  Under this, confirmatory ide ntification tests for raw drugs  are 
mentioned. These include charcoal test, flame colouration test, effect of heat, solubility in water and acids and reaction wit h different acids. The most important, however, are 
determination of assays for major ingredients and minor constituents, presence of heavy metals and other elements of significance. Details of various tests and methods of determination of elemental assays  etc., Details about Chemical & Reagents are given in 
Appendix -4.   
 General:  
a) Except  a few very simple chemical tests which have been given in  monographs, all 
methods of determination of physical,  optical and chemical properties are given in 
detail in the Appendices . 
 
 b) Instructions, explanations of technical terms, and the methods, given in different 
Appendices , are the standard ones employed in the identification of the ores, minerals, 
metals and inorganic substances. More than one method for determ ination of a 
particular parameter in a monograph is given in this volume and the choice of method to be adopted is left to the user, provided the actual method used is on record with laboratory data.  
 
Miscellaneous:  
 
Temperature:  Except where specifically  mentioned, ambient temperature in Celsius scale is 
intended.  
 
Pressure:  Atmospheric pressure of 760 torr at 00, unless stated otherwise.  
 
   XIII Weight and Measures:  'Constant Weight' implies that under the given circumstances, no two 
consecutive weights sha ll differ by more than 0.5 mg per gram of substance taken for 
analysis. 'Weight taken for analysis ' is the amount to be taken for quantitative analysis stated 
in the procedure within an approximate range, but shall be accurately weighed and shall not 
diffe r from the stated weight by more than10 percent. 
 
Abbreviation s, used in the monographs, are given in a table on next page .  
 
 
     XIV Abbreviations for Technical Terms   
 
 
0C – – 0 
2d sin θ  – – ηλ 
analytical reagent  – – AR 
atomic absorption spectrophotometry  – – A.A.S.  
gram(s)  – – g 
inductively coupled plasma analyser  – – ICPA  
kilo newton (pressure unit)  – – kN 
microgram(s)  – – μg 
mililitre(s)  – – ml 
milligram(s)  – – mg 
nanogr am(10-9 g)(s) – – ng 
nanometer(s)  – – nm 
part(s) per million or gram(s) per tonne  – – ppm 
precipitate  – – ppt. 
quantity sufficient  – – Q.S. 
refractive index  – – R.I. 
refractive index  – – η 
solution  – – sol. 
specific gravity  – – Sp. Gr. 
ultra-viole t – – UV 
x-ray diffraction  – – XRD  
x-ray fluorescence spectrometry  – – XRF  
  XV Abbreviations for Texts  
 
Āyurveda Prakāśa   – – vk-ç- 
B¨hat Rasarājasundara  – – c`-j-jk-lq- 
Bhāvap rakāśa   – – Hkk-ç- 
Caraka Sa ¼hitā Sūtras thāna  – – p-la-lw- 
National Formula ry of Unani Medicines  – – N.F.U.M.  
Rasaprakāśas udhākara  – – j-ç-lq- 
Rasat ara¬gi´ī  – – j-r- 
Rasaratnas amucchaya  – – j-j-l- 
Rasendracintāma ´i  – – jls-fp- 
Rasendracū² āma´i  – – j-pw- 
Śār¬gadhara Sa¼ hitā  – – 'kk-la- 
Siddha Bhe ¾aja Ma´imālā  – – fl-Hks-e-ek- 
Siddha Formulary of India  – – S.F.I. 
Suśruta Sa ¼hitā Sūtras thāna  – – lq-la-lw- 
  XVI INDO -ROMANIC EQUIVALENTS OF DEVANĀGARĪ ALPHABETS  
 
v - a  M - ²a 
Á - ā  < - ²ha 
b - i  .k - ´a 
Ã - ī  r - ta 
m - u  Fk - tha 
Å - ū  n - da 
_ - ¨  /k - dha 
, - e  u - na 
,s - ai  i - pa 
v¨ - o  Q - pha 
v© - au  c - ba 
a - ¼  Ò - bha 
% - ª  e - ma 
d - ka  ; - ya 
[k - kha  j - ra 
x - ga  y - la 
Ä - gha  o - va 
³ - ¬a  'k - ºa 
p - ca  "k - ¾a 
N - cha  l - sa 
t - ja  g - ha 
> - jha  {k - k¾a 
\É - ®a  = - tra 
V - °a  K - j®a 
B - °ha   -  
  XVII  PREFACE  
 
Ayur veda is very much rich in many aspects and the number of drugs and their sources . The 
use of a few mineral s and metals in Ayur vedic med icines  is since Vedic period but scientific 
and systematic stud ies were conducted from  8th century onwards forming an integral part of 
Ayur vedic med icines  called Rasaś āstra  and the formulations called Rasyogas .                 
  
The brief history of Rasaśāstra  reveals many aspects of this science when viewed in 
perspe ctives of identification, Śodhana (Purification), Māra´a (Calcination), indic ations and 
dietetic regimen.  
 
Caraka has used ‘Rasa’  in Kustha cikits ā but it is not sure whether it is Pārada or else. Six 
metals viz. Svar ´a, Rajata, T āmra, Loha, Va ¬ga and N āga have been coined under drugs of 
mineral origin. These metals have been indicated for preparation of different devices like 
Bastinetra, Dhūmanetra, etc. Specialized proce dures like Lohādi Ras āyana, Ayask ¨ti have 
been described so that these metals can be converted into a consumable and efficacious 
dosage form for ther apeutic use. For this, the thin sheets of metals are repeatedly heated and 
quenched in a series of li quids viz. Triphal ā kvā tha, Gom ūtra, Godugdha, Lava ´ajala, etc. 
until conversion to fine powder. Apart from metals, various other minerals like Gandhaka, 
Svar´amāksika, Har itāla, Mana ªśilā, Ma ´²ūra, Gairika, etc.; al loys viz. K ā¼sya, Pitta la and 
gems viz. Mukt ā, Prav āla have been mentioned for therapeutic and other uses. S uśruta, in 
addition to all this, has used P ārada (first non -ambiguous reference) tropi cally.  
 
A¾°ā¬gasa¬graha, for the first time, clearly indicates administration of P ārada for its 
Rasāyana effect. Blowing up metal in a crucible to convert into pow der form has also been 
descri bed by him.  
 
Almost of the marked developments of Rasa śāstra have taken place in this period (from 8th 
century A. D.). The science attended its peak of advancements and opened new horizons in the field of medicine. Several Rasasiddhas  (disciples of T āntrik a doctrine) have contributed 
to this process. The outcomes of their extensive exper imentations have been documented in 
the form of texts. N āgārjuna was the most si gnificant contributor to establish the aims, 
principles and methodologies of Rasa śāstra in an  organized and systematic manner. 
Numerous texts viz. Rasaratnākara, Rasendrama
¬gala, Ras ār´ava have been composed in 
this period explaining Śo dhana, M ārana, properties, therapeutic uses, dose specifications and 
various formul ations of Rasau¾ adhis. The Śodhana and Māra´a methods may either be 
character istic for some specific material or applicable to a group/category. Moreover,  XVIII  specif ications for construction of a pharmacy have also been given instructing specific 
directions for specific procedures and arra ngements required i nside and outside the pharmacy 
campus.  
 
Mainly three types of Physical treatments are adapted in metal/mineral prepar ations i.e. Heat, 
Beat and Treat . Here the treat means the material is treated with many organic preparations, 
the seque nce of physical treatment s may be varied  considering the type of material and 
formulation but the s equence may get changed.  
 In compiling the monographs, the title of each drug had been given in Sanskrit as a lready 
obtained in the Ayurvedic Formulary of I ndia. Then comes the definition physical properties / 
Explanations of Geological/ Technical terms – Terminology used in pharmacopoeial 
Monographs and methods of determination of the drug giving its identity in sc ientific 
nomenclature and very brief informa tion about its source, occurrence, distribution and 
precautions in colle ction if any, etc.  
 
This is follo wed by a list of synonyms in Sa ¼sk¨ta and also the other Indian regional 
languages. The monographs then record the Definitions and Methods of determina tion of 
different optical parameters followed by  Chemical properties along with qualitative  chemical 
tests of minerals by Blow pipe method. Apart from this , the distinct ph otographs of all 
included material s are exhibited.  
 
Since the effort s is to compile pharmacopoeial monographs of Ayurvedic drugs, in the accent 
of the classical attributes of respective drugs according to the doctrine of Rasa, Gu
´a, Vīrya, 
Vipāka and Karma  has not been lost sight of, though some of them appear to be abstract and 
subjective in the absence of established experimental met hods to quantify them. 
 The Legal Notices and General Notices have been given for guidance of the anal ysts, the 
Pharmaceutical suppliers and manufactures and the research workers en gaged in this field. 
Details about the apparatus, reagents and solutions, tests, methods of preparation of specimens for microscopic examinations have been given in the Appe ndices. 
 The Committee hopes that with the publication of Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of I ndia Part I, 
Vol. VII comprising of 21 single drugs of mineral, metal origin, as per the for mat and 
procedure laid down, the different research units under Deptt. of AYUSH under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the other involved laboratories would plan their research enquiries such that the output of work would be accele rated.   XIX  
The Committee urges the Government of India to recommend the adoption of these monogr aphs for the purposes of identity, purity and strength of drugs for use in their 
Government, Semi -Government and Government aided institutions and voluntary public 
organizations. The Ayurvedic Pha rmacopoeia of India, Part -I, Vol. VII may also be notified 
by Government as a book of reference for impl ementation of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940 all over India as Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India Part -I, Vol. I, II, III, IV and V is 
already included in the First Schedule of Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940.  This volume  is specific in nature consisting of monographs on raw materials of mineral and 
metals used in the mineral, metallic and herbo -mineral /metallic preparations.   
  
 
Prof. S.S.Handa                              Dr. S.K.Sharma                              Dr. G.S.Lavekar  
 Chairman                                  Vice-Chairman                        Member Secretary  
          
           XX ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
 
The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia  committee records and duly appreciates  the 
contributions made by the pro ject officers and scientific staff of the participating institutions 
associated with the APC project works  for developing quality standards of Minerals and 
Metals .  
 
The committee expresses gratitude of Ms. Anita Das , Secretary, and Shri Shiv Basant , 
Joint  Secretary,  Department of AYUSH for providing constant support for completion of this 
work and its further continuation and also sincerely thanks to Dr. M.M. Padhi, Deputy Director [Tech.]; Shri. Vasantha Kumar, Asst. Director [Chem.] Dr. Pramila Pant, Res earch 
Officer [Chem.], Dr. M.N. Rangne, Dr. Chhote Lal, Dr. AKS Bhadoria and Dr. Bishnupriya Dhar, Research Officer [Phar], Dr. Nikhil Jirankalgikar S.R.F. (Ayu.), Dr. Rajesh Singh S.R.F. [Ayu.], Dr. Sandhya Rani S.R.F. [Ayu.], Mr. Chinmay Rath S.R.F. [Bot .] for their 
constant efforts in bringing out this volume.  Thanks to Mr. Ashish Kumar , Ms. Meenakshi  
Thakur , Ms. Deepti  Anand D.E.O., who took pains in typing and arranging all the technical 
data into a final shape.   XXI INTRODUCTION 
 
General  
 
The Ayurvedic s ystem of medicine is prevalent in India since the Vedic period and as 
early as the dawn of human civilization. Though Ayurveda has under gone many changes in 
the course of its long history, it still remains the mainstay of medical relief to a large section  
of population of the nation. Due to urbanization and dwindling of forests, the Vaidya by and 
large is no longer a self contained unit collecting and preparing his own medicines as before. He has now to depend on the newly developed agencies like one colle cting and supplying the 
crude drugs and the other undertaking mass production of medicines in the Ayurvedic Pharmaceutical units run on commercial scale.  
 
2. In view of the new trend in Ayurvedic Pharmaceutical field, Government of India 
considered it expe dient to utilize  the existing Drug and Cosmetics Act 1940, to also control to 
a limited measure the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs by amending the Act. 
 
3. The Act was accordingly amended in 1964, to ensure only a limited control over the 
production and sale of these medicines namely: - 
 
i. The manufacture should be carried under prescribed hygienic conditions, under supervision of a person having a prescribed qualification;  
 ii. The raw materials used in the preparation of dr ugs should be genuine and 
properly i dentified; and  
 
iii. The formula or the true list of all the ingredients , contained in the drugs, 
should be displayed on the label of every container.  
The present Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee (APC) was reconstituted or 
constituted under the Deptt. of AYU SH vide letter No.X -19011/6/94- APC (AYUSH) dated 
9
th March, 2005 consisting of following members.  
 
1. Ms. Savita Satakopan, M.Sc.  
(Former Drug Analyst),  
Government of Gujarat,  
7/4, Padmam Flats, Seventh Street, Nanganallur, Chennai – 600 061. 
 Chairperson  
(9th March  2005 to  
22nd June 2006)  
2. Prof. S.S. Handa, M. Pharma, Ph.D.,  
(Former Director, RRL, Jammu), 522- A, Block ‘C’, 
Sushant Lok, Phase -I, 
Gurgaon, Haryana – 122 001.  Chairman  
(23rd June, 2006 to 
onwards)  
  XXII  OFFICIAL MEMBERS  
 
1. Dr. S.K. Sharma,  M.D. (Ayu.), Ph.D.  
Advisor (Ayurveda),  
Department of AYUSH,  
Red Cross Society Building,  
New Delhi – 110 001.  
 Vice -Chairman  
 
2. Dr. G.S. Lavekar, AVP; Ph.D.  
Director,  
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Si ddha, 
61-65, Institutional Area,  
D-Block, Janakpuri,  
New Delhi – 110 058.  
 Member -Secretary  
(Ex-officio)  
 
3. Dr. D.R. Lohar, M.Sc.; Ph.D.  
Director,  
Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine,  
Central Govt. Offices Complex,  Kamla Nehru Nagar,  
Ghaziabad – 201 002.  
 Member (Ex -officio)  
 
4. Managing Director,  
Indian Medicines Pharmaceutical Corporation Ltd., 
Mohan, Via – Ram Nagar,  
Distt. - Almora, Uttranchal.  
 Member (Ex -officio)  
 
5. Drugs Controller General (India),    
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,  
Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi – 110 011. 
 Member (Ex -officio)  
 
NON -OFFICIAL MEMBERS  
Phytochemistry & Chemistry Sub -Committee  
 
1.  Prof. V.K. Kapoor, M. Pharm., Ph.D.  
(Former Dean and Chairman, University Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences,  
Panjab University, Chandigarh)  
1473, Pushpac Complex, 49B,  
Chandigarh -  160 047.  
 Chairman  
2.  Prof. S.S. Handa, M. Pharm., Ph.D.,  
(Former Director, RRL),  
522-A, Block ‘C’, Sushant Lok, Phase -I, 
Gurgaon, Haryana – 122 001.  Member   XXIII  3.  Dr. P.D. Sethi, M. Pharm., Ph.D.,  
(Former Director,  
Central Indian Pharmacopoeia l Laboratory)  
B-140, Shivalik Enclave,  
New Delhi – 110 017.  
 Member  
4.  Shri J.K. Dhing, M.Sc., M. Tech.  
Former Chief Manager (Exploration),  
Hindustan Copper Ltd.,  
SF-8, Gayatri Nagar,  
Sector -5, Hiran Magri,  
Udaipur – 313 002. (Rajasthan). 
 Member  
Pharmac ognosy Sub -Committee  
 
1.  Ms. S. Satakopan, M.Sc.  
(Former Drug Analyst),  
Government of Gujarat,  
7/4, Padmam Flats, Seventh Street, 
Nanganallur, Chennai – 600 061. 
 Chairman  
2.  Dr. (Mrs.) Shanta Mehrotra, M.Sc., Ph.D.,  
Emeritus Scientist,  
National Botanical R esearch Institute,  
Rana Pratap Marg, P.B. No.- 436, 
Lucknow – 226 001 (U.P.). 
 Member  
3.  Dr. M.A. Iyengar, M. Pharma, Ph.D,  
Prof. of Pharmacognosy (Retd.), 14, HIG, HUDCO, Manipal – 576 119.  Member  
4.  Dr. J. Mohanasundraram, M.D.,  
Former Professor of Pharmac ology  
& Deputy Director of Medical Education,  
Chennai.  Member  
Formulary Sub -Committee  
(Rasa Shastra / Bhaishajya Kalpana – Ayurvedic Pharmacy)  
 
1.  Prof. S.K. Dixit, A.B.M.S.; D.  Ay. M; Ph.D.  
(Former Head, Deptt. of Rasa Sha stra, BHU),  
B-3/402, Shivala, V aranasi  - 221 005 (UP.). 
 
 Chairman   XXIV  2.  Dr. B.L. Gaur, Ph.D.;  
Vice- Chancellor,  
Jodhpur Ayurvedic Uni versity, Jodhpur, Rajasthan. 
 Member  
3.  Prof. Siddhinandan Mishra, G.B.M.S.; Ph.D.  
Pharmacy In -charge, SDM Ayurvedic College,  
P.O. Kuthpady, Udupi – 574 118  
(South Karna taka)  
 Member  
4.  Prof. Ved Vrat Sharma, H.P.A.  
(Former Principal, DAV Ayurvedic College),  
House No. 65, Sector -8, Panchkula, Haryana.  
 Member  
5.  Dr. P.K. Prajapati, M.D. (Ay.), Ph. D.,  
Reader & Head, Deptt. of Ras Shastra,  
IPGT & RA, Gujarat Ayur ved University,  
Jamnagar, Gujarat – 361 008. 
 Member  
6.  Dr. Narendra Bhatt, M.D. (Ay.),  
Chief Executive Officer,  
Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd.,  
70, Ghokhle Road (South), Dadar,  
Mumbai – 400 025. 
 Member  
7.  Shri Ranjit Puranik,  
General Manager,  
Shree Dhoota papeshwar Ltd.,  
135, Nanubhai Desai Road, Khetwadi,  
Mumbai. 
 Member  
Ayurveda Sub -Committee  
(Single Drugs of Plants, Minerals, Metals, Animal origin)  
 
1.  Prof. V.K. Joshi, M.D. (Ay.), Ph.D.  
Deptt. Dravyaguna,  
Institute of Medical Sciences,  
Banaras Hindu U niversity (BHU),  
Varanasi – 221 005 (U.P.). 
 Chairman  
2.  Prof. K.C. Chunekar, Ph.D.  
(Former Reader, Deptt. of Dravyaguna, BHU),  
18/7, Ratan Phatak, Varanasi, (U.P.).  
 Member   XXV  3.  Vaidya Devender Triguna, Ayurvedacharya,  
“PADAM SHREE”,  
143-Sarai Kale Khan,  
Nizamuddin East, New Delhi. 
 
 Member  
4.  Dr. M.R. Uniyal, M.D. (Ay.), Ph.D.  
(Former Director, CRIA, CCRAS),  
Director (Drugs), Maharishi Ayurved Products,  
17/18, NOIDA Export Processing Zone,  
NOIDA – 201 305.  
 Member  
5.  Prof. V.V. Prasad,  
Director,  
Rashtriya Ay urveda Vidyapeeth,  
Dhanvantri Bhawan,  
Road No. 66, Punjabi Bagh (West),  
New Delhi – 110 026.  
 Member  
 
 
1. The term of the Committee shall be for a period of 3 years from the date of its  first 
meeting and the members shall hold office for that period. 
 
2. The chairman of the APC shall have the powers to form sub- committees  whenever 
required and to co- opt experts from outside for such sub- committees.  
 
3. The Committee shall have the power to frame procedures of functioning.  
 
 4. The functions of the Commit tee shall be as follows:  
 
i. To prepare a Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India of single and compound drugs.  
 
ii. To prescribe the working standards for compound Ayurvedic formulations  
including tests for identity, purity, strength and quality so as to ensure uniform ity of the finished formulations. 
 
iii. Keeping in view the time constraint, to identify  such methods, procedures and 
plan of work as would enable to publish the formulary and standards of all commonly used drugs to be brought out in a phased manner.  
  XXVI  iv. To prepar e remaining parts of the official formulary of compound preparations 
from the classical texts including standardized composition of reputed 
institution.  
 
v. To develop and standardize methods of preparations, dosage form toxicity profile etc.  
 
vi. To develop Qual ity standards, safety, efficacy profile of Intermediates like   
extracts of Ayurvedic raw drugs.  
 
vii. To develop the Quality standards, safety, efficacy profile of different parts of the plants; as well as to inclusion of new plants as Ayurvedic drugs.  
 
viii. Any ot her matter relating to the Quality standards, shelf life, identification, 
new formulations etc.  
 
5. The following are the targets focus of the Committee: 
 
i. To evolve standards of single drugs mentioned in the Ayurvedic Formularies 
of India.  
 
ii. To evolve standards for compound formulations mentioned in the Ayurvedic Formularies of India & other Ayurvedic formulations of National Priority.  
 
iii. To prepare drafts Standard Operation Procedure of Manufacturing Process (SOP) of Ayurvedic Formularies of India from the cl assical texts and other 
authentic sources.  XXVII  SPECIAL INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME – VII 
(Minerals/Metals/Ores)  
Preamble  
           The materia medica of the Indian Traditional Systems of Medicine is comprehensive 
in its resources from nature. Apart from a major s hare from medicinal plants, both animal 
products and geochemical s are in trade as well as in use by practitioners. The Formularies till 
now published by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India , lists about 65 
substances of Minerals/Metals /Ores as raw materials for use either as single drugs or added to 
compound formulations. Such a list was prepared from classical medical literature in 
¡yurveda, by eminent vaidyas and practicing  ¡yurvedic pharmacists who were members of 
the earlier ¡ yurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committees in the seventies of last century. The list was 
finalized after extensive tours, on- the-spot examinations and consultations with practitioners 
and user -pharmacies throughout the country. They also, for the first time, equated the  
recorded names of single drug in Sa ¼sk¨t literature, with its modern scientific nomenclature, 
with an eye to the future task of evolving quality standards for such raw drugs.  
 Methodology 
           The single drug list mentioned above formed the basis for present work. A general 
format using appropriate geological descriptive titles was drafted by the APC. The format 
specified the inputs required from the collaborating laboratories under various heads, so that a general description, analytical parameters for identification, their elemental composition, 
methods of tests and assays and ¡ yurvedic uses etc., would be available for each of the drugs 
selected. The format was sent along with a preliminary note to the invitees of a Special Committee of Experts, co nstituted by the Ministry under the APC. The experts were from 
Wadia Institute of Himalaya Geology, Dehradun, and also from ¡ yurvedic Research Institutes 
and Universities like Banaras Hindu University (BHU), Varanasi  and Gujarat ¡yurved 
University (GAU), Jamnagar . An Annexure to this introduction gives the details of the 
sittings and decisions of this committee.  
          As a sequel to the recommendation of this committee, further work was initiated by 
allotting a set of  47 Minerals/Metals/Ores to the Na tional Institute of ¡ yurveda (N.I.A.), 
Jaipur  under the Director as the Principal Investigator and Shri J.K. Dhing , Former Chief 
Manager (Exploration) , Hindustan Copper Ltd., Khetri Nagar and Dr. V.N. Rao, Associate 
Professor , N.I.A ., Jaipur  as the Co -Investigators. Using both authentic and marketed samples, 
analytical work was executed at the laboratories of the Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM), Ajmer  
and Geological Survey of India (GSI), Jaipur , with Shri Dhing as the Co- ordinator. This 
volume is based on the  results obtained from the above collaborating laboratories and on other 
inputs from Shri Dhing, Miss Satakopan and the ¡ yurvedic experts of the APC. It 
recommends specifications and standards for 21 raw drugs and includes other relevant details.  
  XXVIII  Structur e of this Volume  
           A chapter on General Notices explains the rules and mechanisms that should be 
followed by analysts while applying the standards and tests in their work. There are various 
Appendices, detailing the methods of tests and assays, the reagents in use, and the equipments and apparatuses necessary. A special feature is a Glossary, to explain the geological terms used in describing the physical properties of the drugs. This is given to help analysts of pharmaceutical manufacturers and th e regulatory bodies who may not be familiar with the 
terminology used in identification of Minerals/Metals/Ores. On the āyruvedic part of each 
monograph, the ' ¹odhana', represents the purity measures as mandatory. Unlike plant or 
animal products, there is no prior preparation of a mineral drug for the market, by any physical or chemical means. Purity for an ā yurvedic Mineral/Metal/Ore does not imply the 
same as it does for other drugs and does not deal with extraneous or introduced matter. While identity an d strength are dealt with by physical and chemical modern tests, the purity 
requirement of a pharmacopoeial mineral/metal based drug is determined by ¡ yurvedic 
process described as ' ¹odhana'. Original º lokas dealing with ' ¹odhana' are included 
in Appendix -5. Hopefully, this would curtail the shortcuts now believed to be in use, by side -
stepping the tedious ' ¹odhana' required and also discourages adverse comments that undesired 
toxic remains are present in such ¡ yruvedic preparations.  
          A preface (
izLrkouk ) written  in Hindi by Dr. B.L. Gaur, currently Vice -
Chancellor,  Rajasthan ¡yurved University, Jodhpur (Rajasthan), and a member of the APC, is 
another feature of departure from routine editorial structure followed for pharmacopoeia. It is necessary to explain the logic behind the use of substances known to be toxic, in medicines 
for human use, place it in a correct perspective from the A yurvedic point of view and counter 
any misinterpretation. The inclusion of geochemicals in the treatment of human diseases by 
traditional method in A yurveda should be justifiable. Hence , this special effort.  
 Scope and Limitations  
           A pharmacopoeia emerges out of the common interests of stake holders. Its ultimate 
purpose is to aid the implementation of the re quirements under a legislation, which ensures 
supply of quality drugs to a nation, and also monitors the activities of those responsible for 
this. The core of objectives for a pharmacopoeia lies in the prescription of quality standards. Such standards should be scientifically sound, technologically attainable (by a small, medium and large scale industry equally), economically viable (for both industry and the common man in relation to the marketed product) and finally, culturally and conceptually compatible  to the 
tenets of the A yurvedic systems of treatment. These are basic to a well worked out 
pharmacopoeia for traditional medicines.  
          Constraints and compromises are inevitable in a pharmacopoeia for traditional 
medicines, considering that empiric al wisdom, accumulated over a few thousand years by a 
highly evolved society in ancient India, is sought to be shackled in a framework of requirements for the 21st century, in an effort to 'modernize' and keep up a global  XXIX  participation. In addition, this i s attempted in a scientific environment of huge knowledge 
gaps, owing to absence of research by modern scientists. Although the metal/mineral drugs 
have been in clinical practice in A yurveda   and in trade since a long time, their role in 
pharmacology and t herapeutics have not been elucidated. The unfortunate effect of this can be 
seen in the monographs, where assay limits have been set for possible active chemical entities 
on theoretical grounds and not on clinical data. It has not been possible to decide definitely, which major element or minor element or trace elements present in such a complex material (an ore) would contribute to the recorded curative properties of the drug using that mineral/metal, and, on that evidence, set a range of upper and lower l imit. Hopefully, future 
research may throw light on such aspects and help improve or rationalize the standards.  
          The sophisticated analytical methods that are invariably carried out using costly 
imported machinery, is a deterrent to their introdu ction in the A yurvedic pharmacopoeia. India  
still lives in its villages and 75 percent of the rural and remote households still depend on traditional medicines. There is no use in having methods that ensure excellent analytical performance of a drug, but t he drug itself is inaccessible to the one who needs it, because of 
the cost factor. Keeping this aspect in view, the APC has strived for a compromise, using much simpler methods and prescribing standards that are weighted rather heavily on parameters that ensure correct identity, established purity at the expense of an accurate estimation of strength. This is also in keeping with the belief that quality medicines in 
¡yurveda for public use can well be promoted by using a correctly identified and purified ra w 
material and following GMPs prescribed both by Ayur veda and modern pharmaceutics, even 
if its mode is unknown.  
          In the above paragraphs, only a few important impediments to the development of 
quality standards for A yurvedic medicines have been outlined so as to keep them at par with 
accepted norms for modern medicines. There are many more grey areas to be tackled, 
especially in compound formulations using geochemicals  like Bhasmas and Rasayogas, but with these words, we offer this volume for public use and welcome comments and criticisms to enhance its value in future revisions.  
                                                                                           
Members of APC  
  XXX  Annexure to Special Introduction 
 
MINUTES OF THE 1ST MEETING  HELD ON 12TH & 13TH JUNE, 2000 WITH THE 
EXPERTS OF ‘RASA SHASTRA’, GEOLOGY’ & OTHER SCEINTISTS TO 
CLARIFY ISSUES RELATING TO THE MINERALS & METAL SINGLE DRUG 
USED IN AYURVEDIC FORMULATIONS.  
 
 A meeting was called for by the Adviser (Ayurveda), Ministry of  Health & Family 
Welfare, on the 12th and 13th of June  2000, to discuss the format, and identity of the mineral 
drugs included in the Ayurvedic Formulary of India, Part -I and II.  Since the advice of experts 
in the subjects Geology and Mineralogy would hel p the scientist and the physician members 
of the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee, to work on the monographs for these drugs, 
some geologists from well known institutes were invited to participate.  Request was also made for actual samples to be brought t o the meeting so that the experts could give their 
opinion on them.  Several of the Vaidyas had brought whatever samples they had, for reference at the meeting.  The following experts who had been invited were present:  
 
1.  Ms. S. Satakopan,  
Member -APC  
Chair man (In the absence of Adviser)  
 Chennai  
 
2.  Prof. S.S. Handa,  
Ex-Director  
Regional Research Laboratory,  
 New Delhi  
3.  Prof. M. Joshi,  
Professor of Geology,  
Banaras Hindu University  Varanasi  
4.  Prof. Ved Vrat Sharma,  
Retd. Professor of Ras Shastra  
 Jalndhar  
5.  Vd. Nanak Chand Sharma  
Director,  
Kaya Maya Pharmacy  
 New Delhi  
6.  Dr. C.B. Jha  
Reader,  
Deptt. of Ras Shastra  
Banaras Hindu University 
 Varanasi  
7.  Dr. K.K. Sharma  
Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology,  
 Dehradun   XXXI  8.  Dr. N.S. Virdi  
Director  
Wadia Institute o f Himalayan Geology  
 Dehradun  
9.  Dr. Y.B. Tripati  
Reader,  
Deptt of Medicinal Chemistry,  
Institution of Medical Sciences,  
Banaras Hindu University 
 Varanasi  
10.  Dr. R.U. Ahmed,  
Director, PLIM  
 Ghaziabad  
11.  Dr. Rajeev Kumar,  
Senior Scientific Officer, PLIM  
 Ghaziabad  
12.  Dr. P. C. Srivastava  
Senior Scientific Officer, PLIM  
 Ghaziabad  
13.  Dr. N.N. Pandey,  
Chemist  
Drug Testing Laboratory  
 Haridwar  
14.  Dr. M.L. Sharma,  
Deputy Adviser (AY.)  
 Deptt. of ISM & H  
15.  Dr. Aliya Aman,  
Deputy Adviser (Unani)  
 Deptt. of ISM & H  
16.  Dr. J. Pandey,  
Asstt. Adviser (Ayur)  
 Deptt. of ISM & H  
17.  Dr. D.C. Katoch,  
Asstt. Adviser (Ayur)  
 Deptt. of ISM & H  
18.  Dr. Chhote Lal,  
S.T. A. (Ayur)  
 Deptt. of ISM & H  
19.  Dr. A.K.S. Bhadoria,  
Research Asstt. (Ayur)  Deptt. of ISM & H  
 
 
 
  XXXII   Following experts could not attend the meeting  
 
1.  Dr. I Sanjeev Rao  Hyderabad  
2.  Dr. (Mrs.) A. S. Paranjape  Varanasi  
3.  Prof. R.K. Lal  Varanasi  
4.  Dr. Balendu Prakash  Dehradun  
 
 A background note and a list of minerals in use by the practitioners in Ayurveda, 
Siddha and Unani had earlier been distributed.  A draft format for preparing the monographs under suitable parameters was also distributed at the meeting, so that the geologist present at the meeting may suggest additions or alterations, and finalise a format for dra fting 
monographs.   At the beginning, the chairman explained the work to be done, and the help desired 
from the experts in Geology, on the basis of discussions with the Vaidyas across the table, and their observations on the clinical use of the minerals.  After some general discussion, the following business was conducted.  
 1. The geological experts found the draft format for preparing monographs satisfactory for its purpose and agreed that it gave sufficient characteristics for identity of the minerals and m etals.  
 2. Each item in the list supplied already, with a note on each, giving the available current information was then taken up and decisions taken regarding their identity and scientific names.  
 
3. Since the latest information on the minerals and metals wou ld be available with 
geologists, they were requested to kindly help the APC by furnishing more details.  
 
a) Title ( this would be the same as that appearing in the list)  
b) Broad classification (Details already given in the format)  
 
   XXXIII  |ÉºiÉÉ´ÉxÉÉ  
 
 +ÉÉªÉÖ´Éæn BÉEÉ ={Énä¶É A´ÉÆ iÉnxÉÖ°ô{É |ÉªÉÉäMÉ àÉxÉÖ­ªÉ àÉÉjÉ BÉEä ÉÊciÉ BÉEä ÉÊãÉªÉä cÖ+ÉÉ cè* +ÉÉªÉÖ´Éæn BÉEä àÉÚãÉ£ÉÚiÉ 
ÉÊºÉ)kxiÉÉå àÉå {É \SÉàÉcÉ£ÉÚiÉ BÉEÉÒ +É´ÉvÉÉ®hÉÉ ABÉE àÉck´É{ÉÚhÉÇ ÉÊºÉ)k xiÉ cé* ¶É®ÉÒ® BÉEÉä {ÉÉ\ SÉ£ÉÉèÉÊiÉBÉE àÉÉxÉÉ MÉªÉÉ cè 
iÉlÉÉ <ºÉ ¶É®ÉÒ® BÉEÉ ¶ÉÉÒhÉÇxÉ ¶É®ÉÒ® BÉEä º´É°ô{É BÉEä +ÉÉvÉÉ® {É® cÉäxÉä BÉEä ºÉÉlÉ ºÉÉlÉ nä¶É -BÉEÉãÉ-¤ÉãÉ-´ÉªÉ-|ÉBÉßEÉÊiÉ- 
+ÉÉcÉ® +ÉÉÉÊn +ÉxÉäBÉE BÉEÉ®hÉÉå ºÉä |É£ÉÉÉÊ´ÉiÉ cÉäiÉÉ cè* ÉÊVÉºÉBÉEä BÉEÉ®hÉ ABÉE cÉÒ BªÉÉÎBÉDiÉ àÉå ÉÊ£ÉxxÉ -ÉÊ£ÉxxÉ ºÉàÉªÉ àÉå 
ÉÊ£ÉxxÉ-ÉÊ£ÉxxÉ {ÉÉÊ®àÉÉhÉ àÉå xªÉÚxÉ ªÉÉ +ÉÉÊvÉBÉE ¶ÉÉÒhÉÇxÉ cÉäiÉÉ cè +ÉlÉ´ÉÉ ABÉE cÉÒ BÉEÉ®hÉ ºÉä ÉÊ£ÉxxÉ -ÉÊ£ÉxxÉ {ÉÉÊ®àÉÉhÉ àÉå 
xªÉÚxÉ ªÉÉ +ÉÉÊvÉBÉE ¶ÉÉÒhÉÇxÉ cÉäiÉÉ cè * ÉÊ£ÉxxÉ-ÉÊ£ÉxxÉ BªÉÉÎBÉDiÉªÉÉå àÉå ÉÊ£ÉxxÉ- ÉÊ£ÉxxÉ {ÉÉÊ®àÉÉhÉ àÉå ªÉc ¶ÉÉÒhÉÇxÉ cÉäiÉÉ cè*  
  |ÉÉSÉÉÒxÉ +ÉÉSÉÉªÉÉç xÉä MÉcxÉ +ÉvªÉªÉxÉ A´ÉÆ BªÉ´ÉÉÎºlÉiÉ +ÉxÉÖºÉxvÉÉxÉÉå BÉEä ºÉÖÉÊxÉªÉiÉ- µÉEàÉ BÉEÉä |ÉªÉÖBÉDiÉ BÉE® 
ºÉÚFàÉäFÉhÉ {ÉÚ´ÉÇBÉE VÉÉä iÉlªÉ |ÉBÉEÉÉÊ¶ÉiÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉä ´Éä +ÉÉ¶SÉªÉÇVÉxÉBÉE cé* ªÉä iÉlªÉ nÉä |ÉBÉEÉ® ºÉä |ÉºiÉÖiÉ cé  - º{É­]iÉ& 
xÉÉàÉÉÊxÉnæ¶É{É®BÉE A´ÉÆ ºÉÆBÉEäiÉ{É®BÉE* =nÉc®hÉ BÉEä °ô{É àÉå ¶É®ÉÒ® àÉå VÉÉä ¶ÉÉÒhÉÇxÉ ªÉÉ FÉ{ÉhÉ cÉäiÉÉ cè =ºÉBÉEÉ xÉÉàÉiÉ& 
ÉÊxÉnæ¶É cè* àÉÉÆºÉFÉªÉ àÉå àÉÉÆºÉ |ÉªÉÉäMÉ A´ÉÆ =nBÉE FÉªÉ àÉå {ÉäªÉº´É°ô{ÉBÉE ºÉxiÉ{ÉÇhÉ |ÉªÉÉäMÉ ªÉc xÉÉàÉiÉ& ÉÊxÉnæ¶É BÉEÉ 
=nÉc®hÉ cè * nÚºÉ®É ÉÊxÉnæ¶É ºÉÆBÉEäiÉ{É®BÉE cè, ÉÊVÉºÉàÉå ®BÉDiÉFÉªÉ àÉå ãÉÉèc |ÉªÉÉäMÉ +ÉlÉ´ÉÉ ÉÎ¶´ÉjÉ àÉå iÉÉ©É -|ÉªÉÉäMÉ* 
<xÉBÉEÉ |ÉªÉÉäMÉ ¶É®ÉÒ® àÉå BÉE®xÉä ºÉä µÉEàÉ¶É& ®BÉDiÉÉhÉÖ BÉEÉ ÉÊxÉàÉÉÇhÉ A´ÉÆ §ÉÉVÉBÉE ÉÊ{ÉkÉ BÉEä BÉEÉªÉÇ BÉEÉ BªÉ´ÉÉÎºlÉiÉ °ô{É ºÉä ºÉà{ÉÉnxÉ cÉäiÉÉ cè ÉÊVÉºÉºÉä ®BÉDiÉFÉªÉ BÉEÉ +É{ÉxÉªÉxÉ A´ÉÆ i´ÉSÉÉ BÉEä uÉ®É +É{ÉxÉä º´ÉÉ£ÉÉÉÊ´ÉBÉE ´ÉhÉÇ BÉEÉä |ÉÉ{iÉ 
BÉE®xÉÉ cè *  
  ªÉc <ºÉ ¤ÉÉiÉ BÉEÉ ºÉÆBÉEäiÉ cè ÉÊBÉE ´ÉxÉº{ÉÉÊiÉªÉÉä àÉå VÉÉä {É\ SÉàÉcÉ£ÉÚiÉÉå BÉEä |ÉÉÊiÉÉÊxÉÉÊvÉ pBªÉ cé ´Éä ¶É®ÉÒ®ºlÉ 
iÉk´ÉÉå BÉEÉä {ÉÖ­] BÉE®iÉä cé* ºÉÉlÉ cÉÒ ¶É®ÉÒ® àÉå JÉÉÊxÉVÉ A´ÉÆ vÉÉiÉÖ+ÉÉäÆ BÉEä |ÉÉÊiÉÉÊxÉÉÊvÉ pBªÉ £ÉÉÒ cÉäiÉä cé VÉÉä ãÉÉè c, iÉÉ©É 
+ÉÉÉÊn BÉEä ºÉàÉº´É°ô{É cé* <xÉBÉEÉÒ £ÉÉÒ {ÉÚÉÌiÉ ´ÉxÉº{ÉÉÊiÉªÉÉå ºÉä cÉä VÉÉiÉÉÒ cè, ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ <xÉ vÉÉiÉÖº´É°ô{ÉBÉE iÉk´ ÉÉå BÉEÉÒ 
FÉÉÒhÉiÉÉ ªÉÉÊn +ÉÉÊvÉBÉE cè iÉÉä iÉi{É®BÉE ´ÉxÉº{ÉÉÊiÉªÉÉÄ <ºÉBÉEÉÒ {ÉÚÉÌiÉ BÉEä ÉÊãÉªÉä {ÉªÉÉÇ{iÉ xÉcÉÓ cÉäiÉÉÒ, +ÉiÉ& =xÉ- =xÉ 
JÉÉÊxÉVÉÉå ªÉÉ  vÉÉiÉÖ+ÉÉäÆ BÉEÉ +ÉlÉ´ÉÉ +ÉªÉºBÉEÉå BÉEÉ |ÉªÉÉäMÉ +ÉÉ´É¶ªÉBÉE àÉÉxÉÉ VÉÉ BÉE® =xÉBÉEÉ ÉÊ´ÉÉÊvÉ{ÉÚ´ÉÇB ÉE |ÉªÉÉäMÉ £ÉÉÒ 
+ÉÉSÉÉªÉÉç xÉä ÉÊxÉvÉÉÇÉÊ®iÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ*  
  <ºÉºÉä ªÉc º{É­] cÉäiÉÉ cè ÉÊBÉE +ÉÉSÉÉªÉÉæ BÉEä uÉ®É ªÉc +ÉxÉÖºÉxvÉÉxÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ VÉÉ SÉÖBÉEÉ lÉÉ ÉÊBÉE ¶É®ÉÒ® àÉå 
BÉEÉèxÉ ºÉä iÉk´É BÉEÉÒ BÉEàÉÉÒ cÉäxÉä ªÉÉ +ÉÉÊvÉBÉEiÉÉ cÉäxÉä ºÉä BÉEÉèxÉ ºÉä ãÉFÉh É =i{ÉxxÉ cÉäiÉä cé iÉlÉÉ =xcå nÚ® BÉE®xÉä BÉEä 
ÉÊãÉªÉä BÉEÉèxÉ ºÉä pBªÉ (´ÉxÉº{ÉÉÊiÉ,JÉÉÊxÉVÉ A´ÉÆ vÉÉiÉÖ +ÉÉÉÊn)  ={ÉªÉÖBÉDiÉ cé* 
 
 ´ÉiÉÇàÉÉxÉ BÉEÉãÉ àÉå ÉÊ´ÉÉÊ£ÉxxÉ ÉÊ´É­ÉªÉÉå BÉEä ÉÊ´ÉJªÉÉiÉ ÉÊ´É¶Éä­ÉYÉÉå BÉEä uÉ®É ABÉE º´É® àÉå +ÉÉ´ÉÉVÉ =~É< Ç VÉÉ ®cÉÒ 
cè ÉÊBÉE +ÉÉªÉÖ´ÉænÉÒªÉ ®ºÉ -£ÉºàÉå ¶É®ÉÒ® BÉEä ÉÊãÉªÉä PÉÉiÉBÉE cé A´ÉÆ cÉÉÊxÉBÉEÉ®BÉE cé* <ºÉàÉå {ÉÉ¶SÉÉiªÉ nä¶ÉÉå BÉEä ´ÉèYÉÉÉÊxÉBÉE 
|ÉàÉÖJÉ cé* ªÉä ¤ÉÉiÉå ´Éä ªÉÉå cÉÒ xÉcÉÓ BÉEc ®cä, +ÉÉÊ{ÉiÉÖ xÉ´ÉÉÒxÉiÉàÉ +ÉxÉÖºÉxvÉÉxÉÉå BÉEä +ÉÉvÉÉ® {É® BÉEc ®cä cé, +ÉiÉ& =xcå 
ºÉcºÉÉ ZÉÖÄ~ãÉÉªÉÉ ªÉÉ ºÉàÉZÉÉªÉÉ xÉcÉÓ VÉÉ ºÉBÉEiÉÉ*   XXXIV   ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ ªÉc £ÉÉÒ VÉÉxÉ ãÉäxÉÉ SÉÉÉÊcªÉä ÉÊBÉE =xÉBÉEä ªÉä +ÉxÉÖºÉxvÉÉxÉ -{ÉÉÊ®hÉÉàÉ ABÉEiÉ& ºÉcÉÒ cÉäiÉä cÖªÉä £ÉÉÒ 
ABÉEÉxiÉiÉ& ºÉcÉÒ xÉcÉÓ cé* ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ =xcå ªÉc ¤ÉÉiÉ ÉÊxÉÉÎ¶SÉiÉ àÉÉ{ÉnhbÉå A´ÉÆ ÉÊ´ ÉÉÊvÉ-ÉÊ´ÉÉÊciÉ-|ÉÉÊµÉEªÉÉ+ÉÉäÆ BÉEä uÉ®É cÉÒ 
ºÉàÉZÉÉªÉÉÒ VÉÉ ºÉBÉEiÉÉÒ cè* ÉÊVÉºÉBÉEä ÉÊãÉªÉä £ÉÉ®iÉ -ºÉ®BÉEÉ® BÉEä  +ÉÉªÉÖ­É- ÉÊ´É£ÉÉMÉ xÉä ¤ÉÉÒbÉ =~ÉªÉÉ cè iÉlÉÉ +ÉÉªÉÖ´ÉænÉÒªÉ 
+ÉÉè­ÉvÉ-ÉÊxÉàÉÉÇhÉ BÉEÉÒ ºÉà{ÉÚhÉÇ |ÉÉÊµÉEªÉÉ+ÉÉäÆ BÉEÉä +ÉÉvÉÖÉÊxÉBÉE àÉÉ{Én hbÉå {É® {ÉÉÊ®àÉÉÉÊ{ÉiÉ BÉE® ºÉà{ÉÚhÉÇ ÉÊ´ÉYÉÉxÉ -ÉÊ´É¶Éä­ÉYÉÉå BÉEä 
ºÉÉàÉxÉä ®JÉxÉä BÉEÉ ºiÉÖiªÉ |ÉªÉÉºÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ cè*  
 
 <ºÉ ºÉxn£ÉÇ àÉå ºÉ¤É ºÉä {ÉcãÉä ABÉE ¤ÉÉiÉ ºÉàÉZÉ ãÉäxÉÉ +ÉÉ´É¶ªÉBÉE cè ÉÊBÉE ªÉä JÉÉÊxÉVÉ A´ÉÆ vÉÉiÉÖ +ÉÉÉÊn ¶É®ÉÒ® 
BÉEä ÉÊãÉªÉä iÉ£ÉÉÒ  ÉÊciÉBÉE® cé VÉ¤ÉÉÊBÉE <xÉBÉEÉ ÉÊ´ÉÉÊvÉÉÊ´ÉÉÊciÉ- |ÉªÉÉäMÉ cÉä, +ÉxªÉlÉÉ ´Éä +ÉÉÊciÉBÉE® cÉÒ cÉäiÉä cé* <xÉBÉEä 
ÉÊ´ÉÉÊvÉÉÊ´ÉÉÊciÉ- |ÉªÉÉäMÉ BÉEÉä 4 ºiÉ®Éå àÉå ÉÊ´É£ÉBÉDiÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ VÉÉ ºÉBÉEiÉÉ cè - 
 
1 JÉÉÊxÉVÉ, vÉÉiÉÖ +ÉÉÉÊn BÉEä =kÉàÉ º´É°ô{É BÉEÉ SÉªÉxÉ  
2 JÉÉÊxÉVÉ +ÉÉÉÊn BÉEÉ ºÉàÉÖÉÊSÉiÉ ¶ÉÉävÉxÉ  
3 <xÉBÉEÉ ºÉàÉÖÉÊSÉiÉ àÉÉ®hÉ (£ÉºàÉ -ÉÊxÉàÉÉÇhÉ) 
4 <xÉBÉEÉ ÉÊxÉªÉiÉ +ÉxÉÖ{ÉÉxÉ A´ÉÆ ºÉàÉÖÉÊSÉiÉ {ÉlªÉ BÉEä ºÉÉlÉ |ÉªÉÉäMÉ  
 
 VÉÉä BÉEÉàÉ +ÉÉªÉÖ´ÉæÉÊnBÉE {ÉEÉàÉÉæBÉEÉäÉÊ{ÉªÉÉ BÉEàÉä]ÉÒ ( APC) BÉE® ®cÉÒ cè, ªÉc +É¤É xÉª ÉÉ cè, ªÉc BÉEiÉ<Ç xÉcÉÓ 
ºÉàÉZÉxÉÉ SÉÉÉÊcªÉä* ={ÉªÉÇÖBÉDiÉ SÉÉ®Éå BÉEÉªÉÇ  (ªÉÉ ºiÉ®)  iÉÉä ºÉÉÊnªÉÉå ºÉä cÉäiÉä +ÉÉªÉä cé* ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ <iÉxÉÉ +É´É¶ªÉBÉE cè ÉÊBÉE 
APC <xcå xÉ´ÉÉÒxÉiÉàÉ àÉÉ{ÉnhbÉå BÉEä °ô{É àÉå |ÉºiÉÖiÉ BÉE® ®cÉÒ cè* {ÉcãÉä +ÉÉvÉÉ® pBªÉ (Raw D rugs) BÉEÉ SÉªÉxÉ 
¶ÉÉävÉxÉ, àÉÉ®hÉ A´ÉÆ |ÉªÉÉäMÉ ªÉä SÉÉ®Éå ºiÉ® ABÉE cÉÒ BªÉÉÎBÉDiÉ,  ºÉÆºlÉÉ ªÉÉ ºÉàÉÚc BÉEä uÉ®É ºÉà{ÉÉÉÊniÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉä VÉÉiÉä lÉä 
+ÉiÉ& pBªÉ|ÉÉÉÎ{iÉ àÉå ºÉÆ¶ÉªÉ, ¶ÉÉävÉxÉ àÉå +É£ÉÉ´É, ÉÊxÉàÉÉÇhÉ àÉå ºÉàÉOÉ ÉÊ´ÉÉÊvÉ BÉEä |ÉªÉÉäMÉ BÉEÉ +É£ÉÉ´É ªÉÉ jÉÖÉÊ] A´ÉÆ |ÉªÉÉäMÉ àÉå ºÉÉ´ÉÉÊciÉÉÊSÉkÉiÉÉ BÉEÉ +É£ÉÉ´É xÉcÉÓ cÉäiÉÉ lÉÉ VÉÉä ´ÉiÉÇàÉÉxÉ àÉå cÉä ®cÉ cè* pBªÉ BÉEÉ SÉªÉxÉ ªÉÉ |ÉÉÉÎ{iÉ +ÉxªÉ 
ºÉÆºlÉÉ ªÉÉ ºÉàÉÚc BÉE®´ÉÉiÉÉ cè, ¶ÉÉävÉxÉ A´ÉÆ àÉÉ®hÉ +ÉxªÉ BÉEä uÉ®É ºÉà{ÉÉÉÊniÉ cÉäiÉÉ cè iÉlÉÉ |ÉªÉÉäM É ÉÊBÉEºÉÉÒ +ÉxªÉ BÉEä 
uÉ®É cÉäiÉÉ cè* +ÉiÉ& xÉ´ÉÉÒxÉ ºÉxn£ÉÇ àÉå {É®ÉÒÉÊFÉiÉ àÉÉ{ÉnhbÉå BÉEÉ ºÉÖÉÊxÉÉÎ¶SÉiÉÉÒBÉE®hÉ A´ÉÆ |ÉSÉÉ®hÉ {É®àÉÉ´É¶ªÉBÉE cè * 
 
 +ÉÉè­ÉvÉ ÉÊxÉàÉÉÇhÉ àÉå ÉÊVÉiÉxÉä £ÉÉÒ pBªÉ BÉEÉàÉ àÉå ÉÊãÉªÉä VÉÉiÉä cé =xÉàÉå 15 |ÉÉÊiÉ¶ÉiÉ pBªÉ JÉÉÊx ÉVÉ, vÉÉiÉÖ +ÉÉè® 
+ÉªÉºBÉE cé* ABÉE àÉck´É{ÉÚhÉÇ =ããÉäJÉxÉÉÒªÉ iÉlªÉ ªÉc £ÉÉÒ cè ÉÊBÉE ¶ÉÉºjÉÉå àÉå =ÉÎããÉÉÊJÉiÉ ¶ÉÉºjÉÉÒªÉ ªÉÉäMÉÉå àÉå ãÉMÉ£ÉMÉ 
53 |ÉÉÊiÉ¶ÉiÉ AäºÉä ªÉÉäMÉ cé  ÉÊVÉxÉàÉå JÉÉÊxÉVÉ ªÉÉ vÉÉiÉÖ ªÉÉ +ÉªÉºBÉE £ÉÉÒ cé* +ÉiÉ& ªÉc  - +ÉÉ´É¶ªÉBÉE cè ÉÊBÉE 
 
(BÉE) pBªÉ BÉEä {É®ÉÒFÉhÉ BÉEÉÒ ÉÊxÉªÉiÉ |ÉÉÊµÉEªÉÉ cÉä VÉÉä £ÉÉèÉÊiÉBÉE +ÉÉè® ®ÉºÉÉªÉÉÊxÉBÉE {É®ÉÒFÉhÉ BÉEä àÉÉ{Énhb 
 º´É°ô{É àÉå cÉä*  
(JÉ) <xÉ àÉå {ÉÉªÉä VÉÉxÉä ´ÉÉãÉä PÉ]BÉE iÉk´ÉÉå BÉEÉÒ àÉÉjÉÉ ºÉÖÉÊxÉÉÎ¶SÉiÉ cÉä*  
(MÉ) |ÉàÉÖJÉ BÉEÉªÉÇBÉEÉ®ÉÒ iÉk ´É BÉEä |ÉÉÊiÉ¶ÉiÉ BÉEÉÒ ºÉÉÒàÉÉ iÉªÉ cÉä*  
(PÉ) {ÉcSÉÉxÉ BÉEä ºÉÖÉÊxÉÉÎ¶SÉiÉ ÉÊSÉ‡ cÉäxÉä SÉÉÉÊcªÉä *  
(R) ªÉä JÉÉÊxÉVÉ +ÉÉÉÊn ={ÉªÉÉäMÉÉÒ º´É°ô{É àÉå |ÉÉ{iÉ cÉå*  
(SÉ) <xÉBÉEÉ ¶ÉÉävÉxÉ A´ÉÆ àÉÉ®hÉ ÉÊ´ÉÉÊvÉ{É®BÉE cÉä*   XXXV  (U) <xÉBÉEÉÒ ABÉE ¤ÉÉ® àÉå |ÉªÉÖBÉDiÉ BÉ EÉÒ VÉÉxÉä ´ÉÉãÉÉÒ +ÉÉÊvÉBÉEiÉàÉ àÉÉjÉÉ,xªÉÚxÉiÉàÉ àÉÉjÉÉ A´ÉÆ {ÉÚhÉÇiÉ&  |ÉªÉÖVªÉàÉÉxÉ 
àÉÉjÉÉ ºÉÖÉÊxÉÉÎ¶SÉiÉ cÉä*  
 
 <xÉ ºÉ¤É ¤ÉÉiÉÉå BÉEÉä vªÉÉxÉ àÉå ®JÉiÉä cÖªÉä VÉÉä |ÉÉÊµÉEªÉÉ +É{ÉxÉÉªÉÉÒ MÉ<Ç, =ºÉBÉEä +ÉÉvÉÉ® {É® ºÉ´ÉÇ|ÉlÉàÉ  21 
pBªÉÉå BÉEÉ {ÉÉÊ®SÉªÉ iÉèªÉÉ® BÉE® |ÉBÉEÉÉÊ¶ÉiÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ VÉÉ ®cÉ cè, ÉÊVÉºÉ àÉå |ÉàÉÖJÉ ÉÊ´É¶Éä­ÉiÉÉªÉå ªÉä cé - 
 
(BÉE) +ÉÉªÉÖ´Éæn BÉEÉÒ ºÉÆÉÊciÉÉ+ÉÉäÆ +ÉÉè® ÉÊxÉPÉh]Ö+ÉÉäÆ BÉEä +ÉÉvÉÉ® {É® <xÉBÉEä ´ÉhÉÇ, º´É°ô{É, £ÉÉ®ÉÎºlÉÉÊiÉ A´ÉÆ 
 MÉxvÉÉÉÊn  ºÉä ºÉà¤ÉÉÎxvÉiÉ ´ÉhÉÇxÉ  
(JÉ) <xÉ OÉxlÉÉå BÉEä +ÉÉvÉÉ® {É® cÉÒ ®ºÉ,MÉÖhÉ,´ÉÉÒªÉÇ,ÉÊ´É{ÉÉBÉE +ÉÉè® |É£ÉÉ´É BÉEÉ =ããÉäJÉ  
(MÉ) +ÉÉÎMxÉ ªÉÉ +ÉxªÉ ={ÉÉªÉ ªÉÉÊn ¶ÉÉºjÉ àÉå =ÉÎããÉÉÊJÉiÉ cé iÉÉä =xÉBÉEä +ÉÉvÉÉ® {É® ÉÊBÉEªÉä VÉÉxÉä ´ÉÉãÉä 
 ®ÉºÉÉªÉÉÊxÉBÉE {É®ÉÒFÉhÉÉå BÉEÉ =ããÉäJÉ*  
(PÉ) +ÉÉvÉÖÉÊxÉBÉE +ÉxÉÖºÉxvÉÉxÉÉå BÉEä +ÉÉvÉÉ® {É® ºÉÖÉÊxÉÉÎ¶SÉiÉ ´ÉhÉÇ -º´É°ô{É +ÉÉÉÊn BÉEä |ÉBÉEÉÉÊ¶ÉiÉ iÉlªÉÉå BÉEÉ 
 =ããÉäJÉ* 
(R) |ÉªÉÉäMÉ¶ÉÉãÉÉÒªÉ |ÉÉàÉÉÉÊhÉBÉE {É®ÉÒFÉhÉÉå BÉEÉ =ããÉäJÉ  
(SÉ) àÉÉäxÉÉäOÉÉ{ÉE ÉÊxÉàÉÉÇhÉ  
 <xÉ ºÉ¤É ÉÊ´É¶Éä­ÉiÉÉ+ÉÉäÆ BÉEä +ÉÉvÉÉ® {É® ºÉÆBÉEÉÊ ãÉiÉ, ®ÉÊSÉiÉ,=ÉÎããÉÉÊJÉiÉ A´ÉÆ ºÉà{ÉÉÉÊniÉ +ÉÆ¶ÉÉä ºÉä ªÉÖBÉDiÉ  ªÉc   
       |ÉlÉàÉ |ÉBÉEÉ¶ÉxÉ +ÉiªÉxiÉ ={ÉªÉÉäMÉÉÒ ®cäMÉÉ iÉlÉÉ <ºÉBÉEä ÉÊxÉàxÉÉÊãÉÉÊJÉiÉ {ÉÉÊ®hÉÉàÉ +ÉÉxÉä ºÉÖÉÊxÉÉÎ¶SÉiÉ cé,ªÉlÉÉ-  
(BÉE) ={ÉªÉÉäMÉÉÒ =ÉÊSÉiÉ pBªÉÉå BÉEÉÒ ºÉàÉÖÉÊSÉiÉ {ÉcSÉÉxÉ A´ÉÆ ºÉcVÉ ={ÉãÉÉÎ¤vÉ*  
(JÉ) =kÉàÉ pBªÉÉå BÉEÉÒ ={ÉãÉÉÎ¤vÉ BÉEÉÒ |ÉÉÊµÉEªÉÉ BÉEä ÉÊxÉvÉÉÇ®hÉ àÉå ¶ÉÉºÉBÉEÉÒªÉ ºÉc£ÉÉÉÊMÉiÉÉ*  
(MÉ) pBªÉÉå BÉEÉÒ ºÉÉÎxnMvÉiÉÉ BÉEÉÒ {ÉÉÊ®ºÉàÉÉÉÎ{iÉ  
(PÉ) +ÉÉvÉÖÉÊxÉBÉE ÉÊ´ÉYÉÉxÉ BÉEä ºÉxn£ÉÇ àÉå àÉÉ{Énhb cÉäxÉä ºÉä ºÉ£ÉÉÒ BÉ EÉä º´ÉÉÒBÉEÉªÉÇ.  
(R) +ÉxªÉ nä¶ÉÉå àÉå |ÉªÉÉäMÉ -|ÉÉÊµÉEªÉÉ cäiÉÖ ºÉàÉÖÉÊSÉiÉ +ÉÉvÉÉ® BÉEÉ ÉÊxÉàÉÉÇhÉ*  
(SÉ) pBªÉ BÉEÉÒ ®ÉºÉÉªÉÉÊxÉBÉE -|ÉÉÊµÉEªÉÉ BÉEÉ +ÉÉvÉÖÉÊxÉBÉE ºÉxn£ÉÇ àÉå ÉÊ´É¶ãÉä­ÉhÉ{É®BÉE {ÉÚhÉÇ YÉÉxÉ cÉäxÉä ºÉä <xÉBÉEä ÉÊãÉªÉä 
 ¶ÉÉºjÉÉå àÉå =ÉÎããÉÉÊ JÉiÉ ¶ÉÉävÉxÉ -|ÉÉÊµÉEªÉÉ BÉEÉä +É{ÉxÉÉxÉä àÉå +ÉÉè­ÉvÉ- ÉÊxÉàÉÉÇiÉÉ+ÉÉäÆ BÉEÉä |Éä®hÉÉ ÉÊàÉãÉäMÉÉÒ*  
(U) <ºÉ ºÉxn£ÉÇ àÉå +ÉÉMÉä +ÉxÉÖºÉxvÉÉxÉ BÉEä àÉÉMÉÇ JÉÖãÉåMÉä +ÉÉè® +ÉxÉÖºÉxvÉÉxÉBÉEiÉÉÇ+ÉÉäÆ BÉEÉä |Éä®hÉÉ ÉÊàÉãÉäMÉÉÒ *  
(VÉ) VÉÉä ãÉÉäMÉ <xÉ ºÉä ÉÊxÉÉÌàÉi É +ÉÉè­ÉÉÊvÉªÉÉå BÉEÉä PÉÉiÉBÉE ¤ÉiÉÉiÉä cé iÉlÉÉ +ÉÉãÉÉäSÉxÉÉ BÉE®iÉä cé =xÉBÉEÉä 
 ºÉàÉÖÉÊSÉiÉ VÉ´ÉÉ¤É ÉÊàÉãÉäMÉÉ*  
(ZÉ) ºÉ¤É ºÉä ¤É½É ãÉÉ£É ªÉc cè ÉÊBÉE ¤ÉÉVÉÉ® àÉå +Éã{ÉMÉÖhÉ,+Éã{É|É£ÉÉ´ÉÉÒ, +ÉxÉÖ{ÉªÉÉäMÉÉÒ pBªÉÉå BÉEä ºlÉÉxÉ {É® 
 MÉÖhÉ´ÉÉxÉÂ,|É£ÉÉ´ÉÉÒ A´ÉÆ ={ÉªÉÉäMÉÉÒ pBªÉ ÉÊàÉãÉxÉä ãÉMÉåMÉä*  
(\É) Drugs and cosmetics act 1940 BÉEä +ÉxÉÖ°ô{É ={ÉªÉÖBÉDiÉ àÉÉ{ÉnhbÉå BÉEä +ÉxÉÖ°ô{É 
 +ÉÉè­ÉvÉ-ÉÊxÉàÉÉÇhÉ  cäiÉÖ ¤ÉÉvªÉ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ VÉÉ ºÉBÉEiÉÉ cè iÉlÉÉ <ºÉBÉEÉä ºÉàÉÖÉÊSÉiÉ °ô{É ºÉä ãÉÉMÉÚ ÉÊBÉEªÉÉ VÉÉ 
 ºÉBÉEiÉÉ cè *  
 
                            oS| cuokjh  yky x©M 
                      midqyifr] jktLÉku Á;÷osZn foýfo|ky;]  
                          t¨Ìiqj ¼jktLÉku½  XXXVI  CONTRIBUTING LABORATORIES & INSTITUTIONS  
 
 Various tests, studies and analyses, conducted for raw drug s by the following 
institutions/laboratories, are sincerely  acknowledged:  
 
1. National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur (Rajasthan) India.  
2. Geological Survey of India (Western Region), Jaipur (Rajasthan), India.  
3. Regional Ore Dressing Laboratory, Indian Bureau of Mines, Ajmer (Rajasthan), India.  
4. Regional Ore Dressing Laboratory, Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur (Maharastra), 
India.  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MONOGRAPHS   1 ABHRAKA      
(Biotite Mica)  
 
1. Definition  : Abhraka  is Biotite mica, a ferro -magnesium silicate K (Mg Fe) 3 
X(Si 3AlO 11) X (OH) 2}. It is a black variety of mica group of 
minerals.  
 
2. Synonyms:  
2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta  : Ghana, Vyoma, Abhra, Niścandra, Vyomaka, Vajra,  
Vajrābhra, K ¨¾´ābhra  
 
  
 2.2 Names in other Languages:   
  Bangali  - Abhraka  
  English  - Mica 
  Gujarati  - Abhraka  
  Hindi  - Abhrak, Abarak  
  Kannada  - Abhraka  
  Malayalam  - Abrakam  
  Marathi  - Abhraka  
  Tamil  - Abragam, Karu ppu Appirakam (S.F.I.)  
  Telugu  - Abbarakam  
  Urdu  - Abrak Siyah (N.F.U.M.)  
 
3. Broad Classification: A Phyllo -Silicate  
 
4. Origin and occurrence: Abhraka occurs in igneous rocks in pure form as well as 
in metamorphic rocks as schists and gneisses. It occurs in ore form in pegmatites 
but pure mineral in sheet -form can be made available through sorting in pegmatite 
bodies. 
 
  It is found in all igneous terrains of the earth’s crust. In India, it occurs 
mostly in the mica belts of Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh a nd Jharkhand. The main 
deposits in these states occur at Ajmer, Bhilwara, Tonk and Pali in Rajasthan, Kalichedu, Thalpur and Gudur in Andhra Pradesh, Koderma and Giridih in Jharkhand. Other known occurrences are in the states of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala and West Bangal.  
 
5. Physical properties:  (Definition/Explanation of technical terms and Methods of Determination as given in Appendix –1).  
 
 Nature  : Platy (separable in thin layers)  
 Colour  : Greenish black  
 Streak  : Greenish black   
 Cleavage  : Perfe ct  
 Fracture  : Uneven  
 Lustre  : Splendent  
 Tenacity  : Flexible   2  Transparency  : Translucent  
 Hardness  : 2.5 to 3  
 Sp. Gr. : 2.6 to 3 
 
6.   Optical Properties: Anisotropic, Biaxial Negative, small 2V and strong 
 birefringence. Refractive Index: η α 1.565- 1.625; η β 1.605-  1.696; η γ 1.605 -1.696  
 (Appendix -2).               
     
7. Chemical Properties:  
7.1 Effect of Heat : Hold a piece of Abhraka by forceps and heat it over a 
burner flame in its outer zone (about 10000). It swells almost double in 
volume. Colour changes from black to silver moon while , water is released. 
   
 7.2 Solubility: Take about 1 g finely powdered (150 mesh) sample of Abhraka 
in 250 ml beaker. Add 50 ml sulphuric acid. Stir the solution. It 
decomposes leaving skeleton of silica (distinction from other micas which are not affected by sulphuric acid).  
  
7.3 Assay : Should contain not less than 50% silica (SiO
2) when analysed by  
 gravimetric method (Appendix -3.1.3).           
           
7.4 Heavy metals and Arsenic: Should not contain more than  the stated limits 
for the following: -  Lead = 45 ppm, Arsenic = 3 ppm, and Cadmium =2 
ppm (Appendix -3.2). 
 
7.5 Other Elements: May contain the following within ± 20% of the stated 
limits:-  Iron = 6%, Aluminium = 5%, Magnesium = 9% and Potassium = 
5% (Appe ndix-3.1 & 3.2).      
 
8. Śodhana:  Shall not be used in formulation without subjecting it to śodhana.  
     
9. Abhraka is always used in the form of bhasma , the therapeutic uses, dose and 
other details of which are given in the monograph of bhasma.   3 AKĪKA  
(Agate) 
 
1. Definitio n:  Akīka  is a silica mineral (SiO 2). It is the banded form of Chalcedony.   
 
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta    :  Akīka  
  
2.2 Names in other Languages:  
English  - Quartz, Chacedony  
  Hindi  - Akīka  
  Punjabi  - Mank, Akīka  
  Urdu  - Aqeeq (N.F.U.M.)  
 
3. Broad Classifi cation: Crypto crystalline  Silica Mineral  
 4. Origin and occurrence: Akīka  occurs generally in pure form. It occurs all over the 
earth’s crust in igneous as well as metamorphic rocks. Wherever cavities are 
developed, silica is deposited and the material becom es Akīka . Banding in Akīka  is 
due to interrupted deposition of silica in cavities. It is a very common semi-precious ornamental stone.  
   Akīka   occurs mainly as fillings in the voids in the Deccan Trap rocks. The 
most important occurrence of Akīka in India is Rajpipla area and further west 
between the mouths of river Tapti and Narmada in Bharuch district, Gujarat. Other occurrences of economic importance are known at Amaravati, Aurangabad, Buldhana, Chandrapur, Jalna, Nasik and Pune in Maharashtra, beds of Krishna and Godavari rivers in Andhra Pradesh, Rajmahal and Sahebganj in Bihar, Dhar and Mandsaur in Madhya Pradesh and Jamnagar, Kutch and Surat in Gujarat.  
   5.  Physical Properties: (Definition/Explanation of technical terms and Methods of Determina tion as given in Appendix –1). 
 
 Nature  : Banded form  
 Colour  : White  
  Streak  : White  
 Cleavage  : Not present  
  Fracture  : Conchoidal  
 Lustre  : Waxy  
 Tenacity  : Brittle  
 Transparency  : Sub-  translucent  
 Hardness  : 6 to 7 
 Sp. Gr. : 2.5 to 2.65  
Fluoresce nce : Remains dark when observed after irradiation with near UV light of 365 to 400 nm   
  4 6. Optical Properties: Akīka  is uniaxial, positive, showing birefringence between 
crossed nicols, with refractive indices between 1.530 and 1.555 with η w 1.544 and 
ηe 1.553 (Appendix -2).         
     
7. Chemical Properties : 
7.1 Reaction with acids : Take about 5 g finely powdered (150 mesh) sample 
of Akīka  in a test tube. Add 10 ml dilute hydrofluoric  acid. It dissolves 
completely in hydrofluoric acid. (Care should be taken in handling hydrofluoric acid).  
       No other acid has any reaction or effect on Akīka . 
 
7.2  Assay : Should contain not less than 95% Silica (SiO
2) when analysed by 
gravimetric method (Appendix -3.1.3). 
 7.3  Heavy metals and Arsenic: Should not contain more than the stated limits for the following: - Arsenic =  190  ppm, and Cadmium = 1.6  ppm 
(Appendix -3.2).  
 
8. Diagnostic property: Bands of Akīka  are typically parallel to each other.  
 9. Śodhana: Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to śodhana. 
 9.1    Śodhana:     [Ref. Rasatantrasāra Siddha Prayoga Sa ¬graha, Part -1, page 73]  
    i) Akīka    :  1 part  
   ii)  Gulāba Jala 
    or 
    Arka Vedamuśka  
    or  
    Go-dugdha   :  Q.S  
 Method:  
   
  Heat Akīka  till it becomes red -hot and dip in Gulāba Jala or  Arka  
Vedamuśka or Go- dugdha for 21 times.     
  
10. Akīka is used in the form of pi
¾°ī or bhasma, the details of which are given in the 
 monograph of pi ¾°ī or bhasma.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  5 GAIRIKA  
(Red Ochre)  
 
1. Definition:  Gairika  is Red Ochre, an oxide of Iron (Fe 2O3). This mostly earthy 
variety of hematite mineral is also known as Reddle . 
 
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta      : Kāsāyakkal, Kāvi, Svarn agairika 
 
 2.2 Names in other Languages:  
 
  Bangali  - Girimā °ī 
  English  - Ochre, Reddle   
   Gujarati  - Geru, Sonāgeru  
  Hindi   - Geru, Gerumitti 
   Kannada  - Hojātha, Jajoo, Kaavi, Kemmannu 
  Malayalam  - Kavimannu  
  Marathi  - Gerū, Sonakāva   
  Punjabi  - Geri  
  Tamil   - Seemaikkaavikkallu, Kāvikkal (S.F.I.)  
  Telugu  - Kavirāyī, Kaavi  
  Urdu   - Geru (Teen -e-Rumi) (N.F.U.M.)  
   
3. Broad Classification: Oxide  
 
4. Origin and occurrence: Basically a hematite mineral, Gairika  is a natural mineral 
pigment found with other iron- titanium oxide minerals in igneous and 
metamorphic rocks as accessory mineral. Gairika  is associated with magnetite. It 
sometimes contains minor amount of titanium and magnesium.  Gairika  occurs as 
an alteration product of other iron minerals or by degradation of highly ferruginous 
rocks in the form of weathered residual concentrations. It is generally found mixed with clay and other impurities.  
   
  Based on their colour, there are two types of ochres found in the country 
i.e. R ed ochre and Yellow ochre. Anhydrous ironoxide is red ochre ( Gairika ) and 
hydrated iron oxide is yellow ochre.  
    In India, Gairika (Red ochre) is widely distributed. Gairika deposits are 
chiefly found in Rajpur, Banaskantha, Jamnagar and Kuchch h in Gujar at, Bellary 
and Bidar in Karnataka, Gwalior, Jabalpur, Satna, Kailashpur, Madhogarh and Mandla in Madhya Pradesh and Udaipur, Alwar, Bikaner, Chittorgarh and Sawai Madhopur in Rajasthan. Other known occurrences are in Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal.  
 
5. Physi cal properties:  (Definition/explanation of technical terms and methods of 
determination as given in Appendix –1).  
 
           Nature  :  Massive clayey                 6            Colour  :  Reddish brown                 
           Streak  :  Reddish brown         
           Fracture  :  Uneven     
           Lustre   :  Earthy           
           Tenacity  :  Brittle                           
           Transparency  :  Opaque                   
              Hardness  :  5.5 to 6.5 but much softer in earthy variety            
            Sp. Gr. :  2.7                  
 
6. Chemical Properties:  
 
6.1 Effect of Heat:  
6.1.1 Gairika  becomes magnetic on heating. Magnetism can be felt using 
a horse -shoe magnet (Appendix -3.3.3/1.9). 
 
   6.1.2  Does not easily fuse in a blow  - pipe flame.  
 6.2 Solubility in Acid:  Soluble in hydrochloric acid.  
 
6.3 Assay:  
 Gairika  should not contain less than 16% Fe or not less than 21% Fe
2O3 
when analysed by gravimetric method (Appendix -3.1.4).  
 
6.4  Heavy metals and Arsenic: Gairika shoul d not contain more than the 
stated limits for the following:-  Lead = 6 ppm, Arsenic = 2  ppm and 
Cadmium = 2 ppm (Appendix -3.2).  
  6.5  Other elements: May contain the following within ± 20% of the stated 
limits :- 1% Magnesium and 1% Titanium  (Appendix -3.1 & 3.2).  
 7. Śodhana: Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to śodhana .  
 
 7.1   Śodhana:   [Ref: Rasaratna Samuccaya 3/49]  
 
   i) Gairika   :  1 Part  
   ii) Go -dugdha   : Q.S for Bhāvanā  
 
  Method:  
  Prepare   fine   powder of Gairika  and Bhāvanā of Go-dugdha 
should  be given three times with suffic ient quantity, dry and use for 
therapeutic purposes.  
  
8.  Gairika has the following attributes:  
 
 8.1      Properties and Actions:   
  Rasa   - Madhura, Ka ¾āya   
  Gu´a  - Snigdha, Viśada   
   Vīrya   - Śīta  7    Vipāka  - Madhura  
   Karma  - Pitta-Nāśaka, Balya, Vra ´a Ropa ´a, Netrya,   
Kaphajit  
 
 
8.2 Therapeutic Uses of  śuddha Gairika: Netra roga (diseases of eyes); 
Raktapitta (bleeding disorder); hikkā (hiccup); vamana (vomiting); vi ¾a 
vikāra (disorders due to poison); Rakta pradara (Menorrhagia or 
Metrorrhagia or both); ka ´²ū (itching); Jvara (fever); dāha (burning 
sensation); Udara roga (diseases of abdomen)  
 
9. Dose:   250 -  500 mg of śuddha Gairika.  
 
10. Important Formulations: Ku¬kumādi taila, Bh ¨¬garāja tai la, Tutthādi lepa, Mahā 
 Jvarā¬kuśa rasa, Laghu Sūtaśekhara rasa, Kāmadudhā rasa  (Mauktika yukta)  
 
 
                                                                                                      
  8 GANDHAKA  
 (SULPHUR ) 
1. Definition:  Gandhaka is sulp hur (S), a non- metallic solid element.    
 
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1     Sa ¼sk¨ta       :    Bali, Daityendra, Gandha, Sugandhaka, Valī, Sugandhik a 
 
 2.2 Names in other Languages:  
  Assami  - Kibrīt 
  Bangali  - Gandhaka   
  English  - Sulphur  
   Gujarati  - Gandhaka  
  Hindi   - Gandhaka  
  Kannada  - Gandaga  
  Malayalam  - Gandagam  
  Marathi  - Gandhaka  
  Punjabi  - Gandhaka  
  Tamil   - Kandagam, Kantakam (S.F.I.)  
  Telugu  - Gandhakam  
  Urdu   - Kibreet (Gandhak) (N.F.U.M.)   
 
3.      Broad Classification:   Native element  
 4. Origin and occurrence:  Native G andhaka occurs in the craters and crevices of 
extinct volcanoes where it has been deposited as a direct sublimation product from 
volcanic gases. It also occurs around thermal springs, in salt dome cap -rocks and in 
sedimentary s equences that contain sulphates along with organic materials like 
bituminous limestone. Gandhaka is frequently associated with gypsum and 
limestone. Native  Gandhaka, which is contaminated with sand or clay, bitumen 
and such foreign matter, is purified by me lting in oven or by distilling in closed 
vessels.  
 
 In India, the deposits of G andhaka are very much limited. The only known 
occurrence is that of Tsokar Lake, Leh district in Jammu and Kashmir. There is no mining for Gandhaka in India. Elemental Gandhaka, however, is recovered 
commercially as a by -product from fertilizer plants at Panipat in Haryana, Naya 
Nangal and Bhatinda in Punjab and Oil Refinery at Mathura in Uttar Pradesh. There are huge deposits of elemental Gandhaka burried underground in certain  
parts of the world especially Poland, Mexico and USA.  
 
5.  Physical properties:  (Definition/explanation of technical terms and methods of determination as given in Appendix –1). 
 
 Nature  :  Crystalline lumps                
 Colour  :  Sulphur yellow                  
 Streak  :  Yellowish white         
 Cleavage  :  Poor          9  Fracture  :  Conchoidal         
 Lustre   :  Resinous         
 Tenacity  :  Brittle                         
 Transparency  :  Translucent                     
 Hardness  :  1.5 to 2.5          
 Sp. Gr. :  1.95 to 2.10            
 
6. Chemical Properties:  
  6.1  Effect of Heat:  
6.1.1 On burning a small quantity in a crucible, Gandhaka partially melts 
with evolution of brownish sulphur fumes. 
 
 6.1.2 Gandhaka melts at about 1100
 where as it burns at 2700 in air with a 
bluish flame yielding sulphur -di-oxide (SO 2).                  
  
 6.2   Solubility: Insoluble in water as well as any acid, but soluble in carbon -di-
sulphide. 
  
 6.3  Assay: Should contain not less than 90% Sulphur, when analysed by 
gravimet ric method (Appendix -3.1.8). 
  
 6.4  Heavy metals and Arsenic: Should not contain more than the stated limits for the following: Arsenic =  1 ppm and Cadmium = 2 ppm (Appendix -3.2).  
  
7. Śodhana:  Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to śodhana.   
 7.1   Śodhana:                         [ Ref: Rasām ¨tam-2/3] 
 
  i) Gandhaka     : 1 part  
  ii) Go -dugdha      
   or  
      Bh ¨¬garāja rasa  (Pl.)  : Q.S 
   
  Method:  
  Take fine powder of G andhaka in a ladle, add little amount of gh
¨ta, 
melt and pour in to the vessel which contains go-dugdha or bh¨¬garāja 
svarasa . Collect on cooling to room temperature, wash with plenty of luke 
warm water, dry, prepare the fine powder and preserve  for further purpose.  
 8. Gandhaka has the following attributes:  
  8.1 Properties and Actions:  
  Rasa   - Madhura, Ka °u, Tikta, Ka ¾āya  
   Gu
´a  - U¾´a, Sara, Snigdha   
   Vīrya   - U¾´a 
   Vipāka  - Ka°u 
   10 Karma  - Rasāyana, Dīpana, Pācana, Vi ¾ahara, Kaphahara,  
Balya, Medhya, Pittala, Cak ¾u¾ya, K ¨mihara, Sūtajit, 
Ku¾°hahara,  Āmaśo ¾ahara, Sūtendravīryaprada, 
Vātahara,  
 
8.2. Therapeutic Uses of  śuddha Gandhaka: Ka´²ū (itching); Ku ¾°ha (diseases of 
the skin); Visarpa (erysepales); Dadru (taeniasis); Āmavāta (rheu matism); 
Kapha roga (disease due to kapha do¾ a); Garavi ¾a (slow/accumulated 
poison); Plīhā  roga (splenic disease); K ¾aya (pthisis); Kāsa (cough); Śvāsa 
(Asthma); Netra roga (diseases of eyes); V āta roga (diseases due to Vāta 
do¾a)  
 
9. Dose:   125 mg -  1 g of śuddha Gandhaka.  
 
10.  Important Formulations: -  Mahāgandhaka va °ī, Pañcām¨ta parpa° ī, Candrakalā 
 rasa, Taru ´ārka rasa, Rasa parpa °ī, Gandhaka rasāyana.  
   11 GODANTĪ  
 (Selenite)  
 
1. Definition:  Godantī  is Selenite (CaSO 4, 2H2O) mineral.  
 
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta : Godanta 
 
2.2 Names in other Languages:  
English  - Selenite, Gypsum  
  Gujarati  - Godantī, Ghāpa ´a, Chirodī   
  Hindi  - Godanti  
  Marathi  - Godantī, Śiragola  
  Tamil  - Karpura Chilajattu (S.F.I.)    
  Telugu  - Hara sothamu  
  Urdu  - Godanti (N.F.U.M.)  
 
3. Broad Classification: Hydrous calcium sulphate  
 4. Origin and occurrence: Godantī  occurs as evaporates; extensive sedimentary 
deposits interbedded with limestone, red shales and clay stones etc. It occurs 
generally in pure mineral form.  
    In India,  significant occurrences of Godantī are at Nellore, Prakasam and 
Guntur in Andhra Pradesh and Bikaner, Barmer, Jaisalmer, Nagaur, Ganganagar and Pali in Rajasthan. Major production of Godantī comes from these two states 
only. There are some other occurrences also reported in the states of Gujarat, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.  
  
5 Physical properties:  (Definition / explanation of technical terms and methods of determination as given in Appendix –1).  
 
 Nature  : Crystallin e showing elongated tabular crystals
 Colour  : Greyish white  
 Streak  : White  
 Cleavage  : Perfect  
 Fracture  : Even  
 Lustre  : Silky  
 Tenacity  : Sectile  
 Transparency  : Translucent   
 Hardness  : 2  
 Sp. Gr. : 2 to 2.5 
 
6. Optical properties: Anisotropic, biax ial positive, large 2V, weak birefringence.  
Refractive index  : η
α,1.520; η β,1.524; η γ, 1.530 (Appendix –2). 
 
  12 7.  Chemical Properties:  
 
7.1 Test for sulphate radical : Take about 0.5 g powdered sample in a test 
tube. Add 10- 15 ml dilute hydrochloric acid and boil. Add 10 % barium 
chloride  solution drop wise. The resulting solution gives white precipitate 
of barium sulphate . 
 
7.2 Assay : Should contain not less than 20% Calcium (Ca) or 30% calcium 
oxide (CaO) when analysed by gravimetric method (Appendix -3.1.5).      
 7.3  Heavy metals and Arsenic:  Should not contain more than the stated limits 
for the following: Lead = 6 ppm, Arsenic = 1 ppm and Cadmium = 4 ppm (Appendix -3.2).     
 
8. Śodhana: Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to śodhana.  
  
9. Godantī  is used in the form of bhasma, the details of which are given in the 
 monograph of bhasma.    
  
       13 GOMEDA  
(Garnet)  
 
1. Definition:   Gomeda  is Almandite {Fe 3Al2 (SiO 4)3}, one of the garnet group of 
minerals.  
 
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Names in other Languages:  
  Bangali  - Gomeda  
  English  - Garnet  
  Gujarati  - Gomeda   
  Hindi  - Gomeda  
  Marathi  - Gomeda  
  Telugu  - Gomedikamu 
   
3. Broad Classification: Silicate of iron and aluminium  
 
4. Origin and occurrence: Gomeda  occurs in two forms; in -situ depos its and 
placers. It occurs as in -situ deposits in metamorphic rocks, mostly in schists and 
gneisses, of argillaceous parentage, crystalline limestone and metamorphosed basic 
and other igneous rocks. In pl acer form, it is found as heavy detrital residue in 
sediments.  
 
 In India, in -situ occurrences of Gomeda exist in many parts of the country 
e.g. Khammam in Andhra Pradesh, Singbhum in Jharkhand, Hassan, Bangalore and Mysore in Karnataka and Ajmer, Bhilwara, Jhujhunu, Sikar, Sirohi and Tonk 
in Rajasthan. It occurs as primary mineral also in igneous rocks such as mica-
pegmatites of Bihar, Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan. The placer deposits, whereas, occur in beach sands of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Orissa.  
 
  Varieties of Gomeda are valued as semi -precious stones.   
 
5. Physical properties:  (Definition / explanation of technical terms and methods of 
determination as given in Appendix –1).  
 
 Nature  : Crystal  
 Colour  : Reddish brown 
 Streak  : White  
 Cleavage  : Not present  
 Fracture  : Sub- conchoidal  
 Lustre  : Vitreo us to resinous  
 Tenacity  : Brittle  
 Transparency  : Translucent     
 Hardness  : 7.0 to 7.5 
 Sp. Gr. : 3.5 to 4.0 
 Fluorescence  : No fluorescence when observed after irradiation with UV rays of 365 to 400 nm   
  14 6.  Optical properties :  Isotropic  
Refractive Index: η  = 1.83 (range 1.75 to 1.90) (Appendix –2.4). 
 
7.  Chemical Properties:  
 
7.1 Assay : Should contain not less than 35% SiO 2, 10% Alumina (Al 2O3) and 
5% Iron (Fe) when analysed by gravimetric method (Appendix -3.1). 
 
7.2  Heavy metals and Arsenic:  Should not contain more than the stated limits 
for the following: - Mercury = 7 ng/g, Arsenic = 2 ppm and Cadmium = 
traces (Appendix -3.2).  
 
7.3 Other Elements:  May contain the following within ± 20% of the stated 
limits:-  Calcium = 0.10 %, Magnesium = 0.10 %  and Manganese = 11% 
(Appendix -3.1 & 3.2).  
 
8.       Distinction from Manikyam:   
Mā´ikya gives a fiery red fluorescence in near UV rays of 365 to 400nm, whereas 
Gomeda  does not fluoresce under the same condition. Mā´ikya is anisotropic, 
uniaxial and negat ive. 
  
9. Śodhana:  Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to śodhana . 
 
 9.1    Śodhana:                                  [Ref: Rasa Tara¬ gi´ī-23/123]  
 
  i) Gomeda     :   1 Part  
  ii) Nimbū  svarasa   [Fr.] :  Q.S for Svedana  
 
  Method:  
  Prepare small pieces of Gomeda , boil in Nimbū svarasa for 3 hours. On 
cooling to room temperature, collect Gomeda , dry and use for therapeutic 
purposes.  
  
10. Gomeda  is used in the form of pi ¾°ī or bhasma, the details of which are given in the 
 monograph of pi ¾°ī or bhasma.  
  
 
           15 JAHARAMOHARĀ 
(Serpentine)  
 
1. Definition:  Jaharamoharā is Serpentine, a hydrous silicate of Magnesium 
[Mg 6(Si4O10)X(OH) 8 ]. This is also known as Green Marble in 
trade.  
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta     :  Jaharamoharā 
 
2.2 Names in  other Languages:  
English  - Serpentine, Green Marble  
  Hindi  - Jaharamoharā  
  Telugu  - Śālagrāma śilā  
  Urdu  - Zahar Mohra, Hajr -us-sum, Fad Zahr Madani, Hajr -
ul-behr (N.F.U.M.)  
 
3. Broad Classification: Hydrous magnesium silicate  
 4. Origin and occurrence: Jaharamoharā results from the alteration, either during 
metamorphism or by late -stage hydrothermal action at temperatures below 400
0, of 
rocks rich in magnesium, containing olivine, pyroxene or amphibole. Magnetite 
usually accompanies this alteration. S ome serpentine occurs as large rock masses 
generally referred to as serpentinites. Nickel in minor amount is generally present in Jaharamoharā. A little amount of Calcium, Iron and Aluminium may also be 
present.  
   
  In India, Jaharamoharā occurs mostly in  metamorphic terrains of 
Rajasthan, Karnataka, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh. In Rajasthan, it occurs abundantly in Udaipur and Dungurpur districts. 
 
5. Physical properties:  (Definition / explanation of technical terms and methods of 
determ ination as given in Appendix - 1). 
   Nature  :  Crystalline, coarse grained, soapy feel  
  Colour  :  Blackish green                  
  Streak  :  Colourless         
  Cleavage  :  Perfect          
  Fracture  :  Conchoidal          
  Lustre   :  Greasy           
  Tenacity  :  Tough                            
  Transparency  :  Translucent                    
    Hardness  :  3.5 to 5                  
  Sp. Gr. :  2.5 to 2.7  
                   
6. Optical properties :  Bi-axial, negative, weakly birefringent with R.I. 1. 546 to 
1.554 (Appendix - 2). 
 
  16  
7.  Chemical Properties:  
 
7.1  Effect of Heat: Take about 1 g powdered sample of Jaharamohar ā in open 
test tube. Heat the test tube at around 5000. The sample gets decomposed and gives 
off a little water.  
 7.2  Assay:  
7.2.1 Should contain not les s than 30% magnesium oxide  when analysed  
            by gravimetric method (Appendix -3.1.6).  
 
7.2.2 Should contain not less than 30 % Silica (SiO
2), not less than 5% 
Ferric oxide (Fe 2O3) and not less than 5% calcium oxide (CaO) 
when analysed by gravimetric method (Appendix - 3.1).   
         7.2.3 Heavy metals and Arsenic: Jaharamoharā should not contain 
more than the stated limits for the following: -  Arsenic = 2 ppm and 
Cadmium = 3 ppm (Appendix -3.2).           
 
  7.2.4 Other elements: May contain the following within ± 20% of the stated limits:-  0.15 % Nickel when analysed by Atomic Absorption 
Spectrophotometer  (Appendix -3.2.2). 
 8. Śodhana:  Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to śodhana.  
 
 8.1    Śodhana:  [Ref. Rasatantrasāra Siddha Prayoga Sa ¬graha, Part -1, Page 73 ]  
 
   i) Jaharamoharā  :  1 part  
   ii)   Go-dugdha   :  Q.S 
     or  
    Āmalakī rasa  
  Method:  
 Heat Jaharamoharā till it becomes red hot and dip in Go -dugdha or Āmalakī rasa 
for 21 times.    
     
9. Jaharamoharā is used in the form of pis °ī, the details of which are given in the 
monograph of pis °ī.  17 KĀNTA LAUHA  
(Iron Ore)  
 
1. Definition:  Kānta Lauha is an Iron ore containing magnetite, a ferric oxide 
(Fe 3O4) mineral.   
 
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta    :  Kānta, Kāntaka, Kāntāyasa 
 
2.2 Names in other Languages:  
English  - Magnetite  
  Gujarati  - Nātīsa   
  Hindi  - Cumbaka, Cumbaka patthar  
  Tamil  - Kantham  (S.F.I.)    
  Telugu  - Sudantu rāyi, Ayaskāntamu 
  Urdu  - Faulad, Aahan (N.F.U.M.)  
 
3. Broad Classification: Oxide  
 4. Origin and occurrence: Kānta Lauha occurs in igneous as well as metamorphic 
rocks as accessory mineral. It is a wide -spread oxide mineral f ound in earth’s crust 
in ore form. Kānta Lauha is commonly associated with hematite (Fe
2O3).  
 
 In India, Kānta Lauha occurs  mainly at Guntur in Andhra Pradesh, Salem  
and Tirucira ppalli in Tamil Nadu, Shimoga and Kudramukh in Karnataka, Mandi 
in Himachal P radesh, Mayurbhanj in Orissa and Noamundi, Notoburu, Gore Pahar 
and Biwabathan in Jharkhand. Other known deposits with hematite aspredominent 
mineral occur in the states of Bihar, Goa, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan.  
 5. Physical Properties: (Definition / ex planation of technical terms and methods of 
 determination as given in Appendix –1).  
 
Nature  : Lump   
Colour  : Greyish black  
Streak  : Reddish black 
Cleavage  : None  
Fracture  : Uneven  
Lustre  : Metallic  
Tenacity  : Brittle  
Transparency  : Opaque  
Magnetism  : Magnetic in nature  
Hardness  : 5.5 to 6 
Sp.Gr  : 5 to 6   
 
     18 6. Chemical Properties:   
 
6.1 Assay :  
Kānta Lauha  in ore form should contain not less than 60% Iron (Fe) when 
analysed by gravimetric method (Appendix -3.1.4). 
 
6.2        Heavy metals and Arsenic: Kānta Lauha in ore form should not contain   
             more than the stated limits for the following: -  Arsenic = 2 ppm and  
             Cadmium = 7 ppm  (Appendix -3.2).  
 6.3 Other Elements:  Kānta Lauha in ore form may contain the following 
within ± 20% of the stated limits:-  Zinc = 95 ppm, Manganese = 500 ppm 
and Silver = 5 ppm (Appendix -3.1 & 3.2).  
 6.4 Acid Insoluble : Take about 1 g of pre -dried finely powdered (150 mesh) 
sample of Kānta Lauha  in 250 ml beaker. Add 50 ml dilute  hydrochloric 
acid. Stir the solution and cover the beaker with a watch glass. Heat on the 
hot plate at 150
0 and digest for two hours. Cool, filter in buchnar funnel, 
wash with water and ignite at 9000. Weigh the residue. It should not be 
more than 13 % of the initial weight of the sample.  
 
7. Śodhana: Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to ś odhana . 
  
8. Kānta Lauha  is used in the form of bhasma, the details of which are given in the 
 monograph of bhasma.   19 KĀŚĪŚA  
(Ferrous Sulphate)  
 
1. Definition:   Kāśīśa  is Ferrous Sulphate (FeSO 4. 7H 2O) also known as Green  
vitriol, Copper as or melanterite mineral.   
 
2. Synonyms:          
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta  : Kāśīśaka, Pu ¾pakāśīśa  
  2.2 Names in other Languages:  
  Bangali  - Hirākas  
  English  - Ferrous Sulphate, Green vitriol   
   Gujarati  - Hīrākasī  
  Hindi   - Kasīs, HīraKasīs  
  Kannada  - Kaasisa, Annabedi  
  Malayalam  - Turusi, Turus  
  Marathi  - Hirākas  
  Tamil   - Annabedhi, Annapeti (S.F.I.)  
  Telugu  - Annabhedi  
  Urdu   - Hira Kasees, Zaj -e-Asfar, Tutia -e-Sabz (N.F.U.M.)   
 
3.  Broad Classificat ion:  Hydrous ferrous sulphate  
 
4.  Origin and occurrence:   Kāśīśa , a secondary mineral, results from the 
decomposition of pyrites in the zone of oxidation and is found in small quanti ties 
wherever pyrite occurs. It occurs widely as efflorescence on the walls and timbers of mine workings. Kāśīśa  is commonly associated with chalcanthite, gypsum and 
other hydrous basic sulphates. Mostly, commercially manufactured Kāśīśa as a 
chemical  is used for Ayurvedic formulations in the country.  
 
5.  Physical properties :  (Definition / explanation of technical terms and methods of 
determination as given in Appendix –1).  
  Nature  :  Massive lumps                
 Colour  :  Greenish white                  
 Streak  :  White        
 Cleavage  :  None         
 Fracture  :  Uneven         
 Lustre   :  Earthy     
 Tenacity  :  Brittle                           
 Transparency  :  Translucent                      
   Hardness  :  1.95 to 2                
 Sp. Gr. :  1.90 to 1.97                  
 Taste  :  Sweetish, astringent taste  
 
    20 6. Chemic al Properties:  
 
6.1 Effect of Heat:  
 
6.1.1 Heated before blowpipe, Kāśīśa  becomes magnetic as felt by a 
horse -shoe magnet.  
 
6.1.2 On strong heating in a crucible, K āśīśa  looses water with evolution 
of SO 2 gas giving pungent smell of burning sulphur.   
 6.1.3 Take about 5 g  fine powder each of K āśīśa  and borax. Heat the 
mixture in a crucible. A brown glassy fused mass results. 
 6.1.4 Efflorescence:  Kāśīśa  is efflorescent in dry air. On exposure to 
moist air, the K āśīśa  crystals rapidly oxidize and become coated 
with brownis h yellow mass.    
 6.2 Reaction with barium chloride solution:  White precipitate of barium sulphate appears on addition of barium chloride solution in Kāśīśa  
solution, dissolved in purified water . 
 6.3 Solubility in water: Take about 10 g accurately weigh ed fine (150 mesh) 
powder of Kāśīśa  in 250 ml beaker. Add 50 ml purified water  to it. Stir the 
solution till Kāśīśa  powder stops dissolving. Put the beaker in the sun light 
till the solution gets completely dried up. Weigh the residue, if any. It should not be more than 5% of the initial weight of the sample. That is, solubility of Kāśīśa  in purified water  should not be less than 95%.   
 
6.4  Assay: Kāśīśa  should contain not less than 25% Iron, not less than 15% 
Sulphur and not less than 45% SO
4 (Appendix -3.1 & 3.3) .     
       
6.5  Heavy metals and Arsenic: Kāśīśa  should not contain more than   the 
stated limits for the  following: - Arsenic = 2 ppm and Cadmium =  2 ppm 
(Appendix -3.2).            
 
6.6  Other elements: May contain the following within ± 20% of  the stated 
limits:-  Copper (Cu) 188 ppm when analysed by Atomic Abosrption 
Spectrophotometer method (Appendix -3.1.9 & 3.2.2).        
  
7. Śodhana : - Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to śodhana.  
   7.1     Śodhana :     [Ref: AFI -Part-I; Appendix -II, Śodhana -6] 
   i) Kāśīśa      :  1 Part  
  ii) Bh ¨¬ganīra (Bh ¨¬garāja) [Pl.]  : Q.S. for Bhāvanā  
   
    21  
Method:  
Powder kāsīsa , add quantity sufficient bh ¨¬garāja svarasa and grind till 
complete moisture gets evaporated. Repeat the process fo r three times.  
 
8. Kāśīśa  has the following attributes: 
 
 8.1 Properties and Actions:  
  Rasa   - Amla, Tikta, Ka ¾āya.  
   Gu´a  - U¾´a 
   Vīrya   - U¾´a 
   Vipāka  - Ka°u  
Karma  - Vāta- Kaphahara, Keśya, Netrya, Rajah  pravartaka, 
K¨¾´īkara´a, Sa¬kocaka (Astri ngent), Balya, Keśya 
Rañjana, Rakta vardhaka  
 
           8.2.  Therapeutic Uses: ka ´²ū (itching); vi ¾a roga (disease due to poison); 
Mūtrak ¨cchra (dysuria); Aśmarī (calculus); Śvitra ( Leucoderma / Vitiligo ); 
Pitta Apasmāra ( Epilepsy due to Pitta do¾a); Pā´ ²u (anaemia); Plīhāv ¨ddhi 
(splenomegaly); K ¨mi (Helminthiasis/ worm infestation); Gudabhra ¼śa 
(prolapse of rectum); Visarapa ( Erysepales ); Netra roga (disease of eyes); 
Śle¾ma roga (disease due to kapha do¾ a) 
 
9. Dose:   60 – 250 mg  
10. Important Formulati ons: Rajah pravartinī va °ī, Kāsīsādi taila, Kāsīsādi gh ¨ta, 
 Śa¬kha drāvaka, Plīhāri va °ikā  22 KHA ¯IKĀ  
(Kaolinite)  
 
1. Definition:  Kha°ikā is Kaolinite (Al 2 (Si2O5) (OH)  4), an aggregate of minerals and      
                               colloidal substanc es commonly known as Clay . 
 
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Names in other Languages:  
  Bangali  - Kha²i, Phula Kha ²i 
  English  - Clay  
  Gujarati  - Kha²i, Kha ²imā°ī  
  Hindi  - Kha²iya, Khariya, Kha ²i 
  Marathi  - Kha²u 
  Telugu  - Sima sunnamu, Sudhā  
   
3. Broad Classification: A  phyllo -silicate of aluminium 
 
4. Origin and occurrence:  Kha°ikā occurs associated with pre- cambrian granites, 
gneisses, pegmatites, phyllites and schists; gondwana shales and sand stones as 
bedded deposits. Kha°ikā is formed by the decomposition of  other alumino-
silicates (feldspars) either by weathering or by hydrothermal activity. It occurs in 
pure mineral form as lumps consisting of very small particles.  
 
In India, Kha°ikā occurs at several places in different states. Most 
significant occurrences are Ajmer, Udaipur, Chittorgarh, Bikaner, Barmer and Sawai Madhopur in Rajasthan, Bankura, Birbhum, Purulia and Darjeeling in West Bangal, Chinglaput, Ramanathapuram and South Arcot in Tamil Nadu, Koraput, Cuttak, Keonjhar and Mayurbhanj in Orissa, Cudda pah, Godavari area, 
Vishakhapatnam and Nellore in Andhra Pradesh, Trivendrum, Ernakulam, 
Palakkad  and Kannur in Kerala and Singhbhum, Bhagalpur, Santhal, Ranchi and 
Gaya in Jharkhand.  
 
5. Physical properties: (Definition / explanation of technical terms a nd methods of 
determination as given in Appendix –1).  
 
Nature  : Lumps (whitish to occasionally coloured layers)  
  with greasy feel and earthy odour   
Colour  : Whitish, occasionally tinted   
Streak  : White  
Cleavage  : Not observable  
Fracture  : None  
Lustre  : Vitreous  
Tenacity  : Brittle  
Transparency  : Translucent  
Hardness  : 2 to 3  
Sp.Gr  : 2 to 3  
  23 6. Chemical  Properties:  
 
6.1 Assay : Kha°ikā should contain not more than 50% Silica (SiO 2) and not 
less than 30% Alumina (Al 2O3) when analysed by gravimetric method 
(Appendix -3.1). 
 
6.2  Heavy metals and Arsenic: Kha °ikā should not contain more than the 
stated limits for the following: -  Lead = 15 ppm, Arsenic = 2 ppm and 
Cadmium = 7 ppm (Appendix -3.2).  
 
6.3 Other Elements: May contain the following within ± 20% of the stated 
limits:-  Calcium = 0.32%, Magnesium = 0.78% with negligible amount of 
Manganese (20 ppm) and Chromium (250 ppm) (Appendix -3.1 & 3.2).  
 6.4 Distinctive Properties:  
6.4.1 Take a small quantity of Kha
°ikā powder on a micro slide. Mix with 
one or two drops of alcoholic methylene blue solution (1% w/v in 
95% alcohol). Drop a cover slip and examine under medium or low 
power. Most particles are stained a deep blue (distinction from talc, which is not staine d blue). 
 
6.4.2 Take a small quantity of Kha
°ikā powder on a micro slide. Mix with 
safranin solution  (1% w/v in 70% alcohol). Drop a cover slip and 
examine under medium or low power. None or occasionally very few particles are coloured red (distinction from bentonite, where all particles are stained deep red).  
 
6.4.3 Place a small quantity of Kha
°ikā powder in a watch glass and add a 
few drops of dilute hydrochloric acid. No gas or bubbles evolved 
(distinction from chalk).  
 
6.4.4 Place a small quantity of K ha°ikā powder (150 mesh) on a micro 
slide and put a cover slip on to make a dry mount. Now add a drop 
or two of purified water  to the edge of the cover slip and allow the 
water to flow under the cover slip. The water should spread through the powder, which gets easily dispersed without forming a gel 
(distinction from bentonite and other clays that would swell and form a gel around the edge).  
       
     
7. Śodhana:  Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to śodhana .  
 
 7.1     Śodhana:     [Rasa Tara¬ ginī. 21/210]  
 
           Method:  
  Wash in sufficient quantity of purified water , filter through a clean cloth and   
             use for therapeutic purposes.  
 
  24 8. Kha°ikā has the following attributes :- 
 
 8.1. Properties and actions:   
  Rasa   - Tikta, Madhura   
   Gu´a  - Śīta 
   Vīrya   - Śīta 
   Vipāka  - Madhura  
Karma  - Pitta śāmaka, Vra´a ropa ´a, Kapha -dāha- rakta -
do¾aghnī, Svedādisrāvahara  
 
 8.2 Therapeutic Uses of  Śuddha Kha°ikā: Śotha (inflammation); Netra roga  
(diseases of eyes); Atīsāra (diarrhoea)  
 
 8.3    External use: Tvak roga (skin disease); Mukh- danta roga (disease of 
mouth and tooth) and Dāha (burning sensation)   
 
9. Dose:   ½ - 1 g of śuddha K ha°ikā for both internal & external use  
 
9.1. Anupāna:   To be taken along with cold water.  
 
10. Important Formulations: Daśana sa¼ skāra cūr ´a (for external)  
  25 MA³±ŪRA  
(Iron Slag)  
 
1. Definition  : Ma´²ūra is a metallic oxide -cum-silicate of iron, generally 
having the composition Fe 2SiO 4 and commonly called S lag. 
 
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta : Ki°°a, Lohamala, Loha Ki °°a 
 
2.2 Names in other Languages:  
English  - Slag    
  Gujarati  - Ma´²ūra   
  Hindi   - Ma´²ūra, Loha kī °a, Si¬gha´aka 
  Kannada  - Loha kitta  
  Malayalam  - Ierumbin Kittam 
  Marathi  - Ma´²ūra 
  Tamil   -  Manturam, Irumbukittam (S.F.I.)  
  Telugu  - Loha kittam  
  Urdu   - Khabus -ul-Hadeed, Zang -e-Aahan (N.F.U.M.)  
      
3. Broad Classification:  Metallic oxide -cum-silicate  
 
4. Origin and occurrence: Man ²ūra is the by -product of the metallurgical process 
during extraction of Iron (Fe) and Copper (Cu) from their respective ores. It occurs 
as lumps, boulders or aggregates at the areas where smelting activity is carried out 
for the extraction of copper and iron. Iron is the main constituent of Man ²ūra 
followed by Silica with minor amounts of Cu, S, Pb, Zn, Ag, Cd and Au.  
  Man²ūra is known since ancient times in India and occurs in over 500 
years old slag dumps near village Singhana (Khetri), distt. Jhunjhunu (Rajasthan).  
Man²ūra of similar quality may occur at other places also in the country where 
smelting of copper ore was carried out in the past.  
 
5.  Physical Properties: (Definition / explanation of technical terms and methods of 
determination as given in Appendix –1).  
   Nature  : Rough lumpy masses, exhibiting voids        
 Colour  : Black  
 Streak  : Black  
 Cleavage  : None  
 Fracture  : Conchoidal  
 Lustre  : Dull 
 Tenacity  : Brittle but hard  
 Transparency  : Opaque  
 Magnetism  : Non-magnetic   
 Hardness  : 6 to 6.5  
 Sp. Gr. : 3 to 3.8 
  26 6. Chemical properties:  
 
6.1 Assay :  
6.1.1 Man²ūra should contain not less than 30% Iron (Fe) when analysed 
by gravimetric method (Appendix -3.1.4). 
 
6.2.1 Man²ūra should contain not less than 30% Silica when analysed by 
gravimetric method (Appendix -3.1.3). 
       6.1.3 Man
²ūra should show not less tha n 80% fayalite (Fe 2SiO 4) when 
studied through XRD method (Appendix - 1.13).               
 
6.2   Heavy metals and Arsenic: Man ²ūra should not contain more than the 
stated limits for the following: -  Arsenic = 6 ppm and Cadmium = 8 ppm 
(Appendix -3.2).          
 
6.3 Other Elements:  May contain the following within ± 20% of the stated 
limits:-  Copper = 0.45%, Zinc = 50 ppm and Silver = 7 ppm (Appendix -
3.2).        
 
7. Śodhana : Man²ūra shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to 
śodhana . 
8. Man²ūra is used in the form of bhasma, the details of which are given in the 
monograph of bhasma.     27 RAJATA 
(Silver metal)  
 
1. Definition:   Rajata (Ag) is a silver - white metal available in the form of ingots.  
 
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta :  Candra, Raupya, Tāra, Rūpyaka, Rūpya, Rūpyamala  
   2.2 Names in other Languages:  
  Bangali  - Rūpā   
  English  - Silver  
   Gujarati  - Rūpum, Cāndī  
  Hindi   - Cāndī, Rūpā   
  Latin   - Argentum  
  Marathi  - Cāndī, Rupe  
  Telugu  - Vendi  
     
3. Broad Classification: Metal  
 
4. Origin and occurrence:  Rajata occurs in nature in the free state, occasionally 
99% pure, but generally containing copper, gold and other metals. Native Rajata occurs in the earth's crust in two principal ways:  
 
(i) as small amounts in the oxidised zone of ore deposits and  
(ii) as deposits from hydrothermal solutions. It occurs with sulphides, zeolites, calcite, barite, fluorite and quartz. Native Rajata is much rare in occurrence 
than native Svar
´a but is widely distributed in small amounts. In recent 
years, much of  the total Rajata production has been obtained as by -product 
of gold refining. It is obtained from its ores mainly by amalgamation with mercury or by cyanidation if present in a finely divided state. If not finely divided, the ores are concentrated and sme lted. But largely Rajata is 
derived from smelting of Lead, Zinc and Copper ores which are 
argentiferous. Pure Rajata may contain Svar
´a (Au) up to 10% with trace 
amounts of Cu and sometimes Pt, Sb, Bi, As and Hg.  
 
   In India, there are no Rajata deposits  as such. It is found associated mainly 
with lead and zinc and to some extent with copper and gold. All galena (lead ore) 
deposits of Zawar, Rajpura -Dariba, Deri -Basantgarh and Rampura -Aghucha in 
Rajasthan, Sargipalli in Orissa, Zangamarajupal, Bandalamotu  and Nallakonda in 
Andhra Pradesh, Hesatu -Belhathan in Bihar and Pauri -Garhwal in Uttaranchal 
invariably contain Rajata. It is available in market in the form of ingots.    28 5. Physical properties : (Definition / explanation of technical terms and methods of  
      determination as given in Appendix –1).  
  
 Nature  : Granular, nuggets and feather like dendrites  
 Colour  : Silver white, turning greyish black due to  
   tarnishing 
  Streak  : White           
 Cleavage  : None  
 Fracture  : Hackly  
 Lustre  : Metallic  
 Tenacity  : Sectile, ductile and malleable  
 Transparency  : Opaque  
 Hardness  : 2.5 to 3.0  
 Sp.Gr  : 10.1 to 11.1 
                     
6. Chemical Properties:   
 
6.1 Reaction with Acids: Prepare solution of Rajata in nitric acid  and add 
hydrochloric acid to it. A dense white curdy precipitate of silver chloride is 
produced. This precipitate is soluble in ammonia.  
 
6.2 Solubility:  Soluble in nitric acid.   
 
 6.3 Assay : Rajata should contain not less than 98.5% Silver (Ag) when 
 analysed by A. A. S. (Appendix -3.2.1). 
  
 6.4 Heavy metals and Arsenic:  In Rajata Mercury, Lead, Arsenic and 
Cadmium should be absent.  
 6.5 Other Elements:  May contain the following within ± 20% of the stated 
limits:-   Copper = 1.40 %, Sulphur = traces and Gold = 0.001% (Appendix -
3.1 & 3.2).        
 
7. Śodhana:  Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to śodhana .  
 
8.  Rajata is used in the form of bhasma, the details of which are given in the 
 monograph of bhasma.   29 SĀMUDRA LAVA ³A 
(Sea Salt) 
 
1. Definition:  Sāmudra Lava ´a is a halite mineral, described as Sea salt  (NaCl).  
 
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta    :  Sāmudra, Sāmudraka  
 
 2.2 Names in other Languages:  
  Bangali  - Karakaca  
             English  - Sea salt   
  Gujarati  - Mī°hu 
  Hindi   - Pā¬gā, Pā ¬gānona, Samudri Namak  
   Kannada  - Hojatha  
  Marathi  - Mī°ha   
  Tamil   - So¨¨uppu, Uppu (S.F.I.)  
  Telugu  - Samudrapu Uppu  
   
3.  Broad Classification :  Halite  
 
4. Origin and occurrence:  Sāmudra Lava ´a is formed as extensive irregular beds 
due to evaporation of seawater in saltpans along seashores  in India. Sāmudra 
Lava´a occurs in association with gypsum, poly halite, anhydrite, clay, sand stone 
and calcite etc. in these pans. Some commercial saltpans, known as source of Sāmudra Lava
´a in India , are Thuthukkudi (Tuticorin) in Ta milnadu, Cambay in 
Gujarat and Sambar Lake in Rajasthan.  
 
6. Physical properties:  (Definition / explanation of technical terms and methods of 
determination as given in Appendix –1).  
  Nature  :  Crystalline coarse grained aggregates  
 Colour  : White / off white                  
 Streak  :  None        
 Cleavage  :  Perfect cubic          
 Fracture  :  Conchoidal          
 Lustre   :  Vitreous          
 Tenacity  :   Brittle                          
 Transparency  :  Transparent                  
 Hardness  :  2.5                 
 Sp. Gr. :  1.98 to 2.2                  
 Taste  :  Salty  
 7. Optical properties :  
 
       Isotropic with R.I.  1.540 to 1.544 (Appendix -2) 
 
  30 7. Chemical Properties:  
  
 7.1 Effect of Heat:  
7.1.1 Take a crystal of Sāmudra Lava ´a on a porcelain plate. Bl ow a 
burner flame through blowpipe over the L ava´a. The colour of the 
flame becomes deep yellow indicating the presence of sodium.  
 
7.1.2 When heated through blowpipe, Sāmudra Lava ´a crackles and 
decrepitates and on addition of copper oxide to it, gives th e usual 
blue chlorine flame (Appendix -3.4.3). 
 
7.2 Reaction with silver nitrate:  Take 5 g  Sāmudra Lava ´a and dissolve it in 
purified water . Add a freshly prepared 5% w/v solution of silver nitrate  
(AgNO 3) in purified water , drop by drop, to this Lava´a so lution. A white 
precipitate of silver chloride  (AgCl)  forms.  
  
7.3  Assay :  
7.3.1 Sāmudra Lava ´a should contain not less than 35% Sodium (Na) 
when analysed by flame photometry (Appendix -3.2.13).  
          
7.3.2 Sāmudra Lava ´a should contain not less than 58% Chlorine (Cl) 
(Appendix -3.1.10). 
 
7.4  Heavy metals and Arsenic:  Sāmudra Lava ´a should not contain more 
than the stated limits for the following: -  Lead = 12 ppm, Arsenic = 4 ppm 
and Cadmium = 4 ppm (Appendix -3.2).  
 
8.  Sāmudra Lava ´a has the followng  attributes: 
 
          8.1   Properties and Actions:  
         Rasa   - Lava´a 
          Gu´a  - Snigdha, Laghu, U ¾´a  
          Vīrya   - Nāti U ¾´a / Nāti Śītala   
          Vipāka  - Madhura  
Karma  -  Vāta- hara, H ¨dya, Bhedī, Rucikara, Dīpana, 
Kaphahara, Śūl aghna, Avidāhī, Ī ¾at Pittala, Snehana, 
Pācana, Kledana, Balya  
 
8.2 Therapeutic Uses: Ajīr ´a (dyspepsia), Śo ¾a (cachexia), Jīr ´a carma roga 
(chronic skin diseases), Galaga´² a (goiter), Pā ´²u (anaemia), Pratiśyāya 
(coryza)  
 
9. Dose  - According to formulation 
  
10. Important Formulations: Lava ´a Bhāskara cūr ´a, Sāmudrādya cūr ´a, Nārāya´ a 
 cūr´a, Mahāśa¬kha va °ī, Kalyānaka gu ²a     31 SAUVĪRĀ ¿JANA    
 (Lead Ore)  
 
1. Definition:  Sauvīrā ®jana is a lead ore containing galena (PbS) mineral.   
   
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta : Nīlā®jana, K ¨¾´ā®jana 
 
 2.2 Names in other Languages:   
 Bangali  - Suramā 
 English  - Galena, Lead ore  
 Gujarati  - Suramo  
 Hindi  - Suramā, Kālā Suramā  
 Marathi  - Suramā 
 Tamil  - Vangam (S.F.I.)  
 Telugu  - Sauvir ā®janamu, Surmā rayi  
 Urdu  - Surmah Siyah, Kohal Isphahani, Sang -e-surma (N.F.U.M.)  
 
      3. Broad Classification : Sulphide  
 
4. Origin and occurrence:  Sauvīrā ®jana occurs in metamorphic as well as 
sedimentary rocks in the form of disseminations, veins or lodes. It occurs mostly in 
pure cubic crystal form and also in ore form associated with rock mass. 
Sauvīrā ®jana invariably occurs in association with sphalerite (ZnS), their host rock 
generally being limestone, dolomite and other calc- magnesium rich rocks. 
Chalcopyrite and pyrite may co -occur in small amount. Silver in minor quantity is 
always associated. Trace amount of Arsenic, Iron, Cadmium, Gold, Bismuth and Antimony is also reported in Sauvīrā
®jana. 
 
In India, Sauvīrā ®jana occurs mostly at Zawar, Aghucha, Rajpura- Dariba, 
Deri - Basanthgarh and G ugra in Rajasthan, Bandalamottu and Zangamarajupal in 
Andhra Pradesh, Ambaji in Gujarat, Sargipalli in Orissa and Gorubathan in West Bengal. Mining of Sauvīrā
®jana from most of these areas is carried out by 
Hindustan Zinc Limited (A unit of Vedanta), producing more than 90% lead ore in 
the country.   
 
5. Physical Properties : (Definition / explanation of technical terms and methods of 
determination as given in Appendix –1).  
 
 Nature  : Usually lumps and heavy cubic crystals   
 Colour  : Grey  
 Streak  : Grey  
 Cleava ge : Cubic  
 Fracture  : Even  
  Lustre  : Metallic  
 Tenacity  : Brittle  
 Transparency  : Opaque   32  Hardness  : 2 to 3 
  Sp. Gr. : 7 to 8 
 
6.  Chemical properties:   
 
 6.1 Charcoal Test : When heated on charcoal through blow pipe, Sauvīrā ®jana 
fuses easily, emits sulphurous fumes and on continued heating yields a 
globule of metallic lead (Appendix -3.4.4). 
 
6.2 Effect of Acids:   
6.2.1 Take about 5 g of finely powdered (150 mesh) Sauvīrā ®jana in a 
test tube. Add 10 ml dilute nitric acid  and heat. It evolves brownish 
fumes.   
 
 6.2.2 Take about 5 g finely powdered (150 mesh) Sauvīrā ®jana in a test 
tube. Add 10 ml dilute hydrochloric acid and heat. It evolves 
hydrogen sulphide  (H2S) gas, as detected by its odour of rotten 
eggs.   
 
6.3 Assay :   
6.3.1 Sauvīrā ®jana in ore form should contain not less than 50% Lead 
(Pb) when analysed by A. A. S. (Appendix -3.2.2).       
 
6.3.2 Sauvīrā ®jana in ore form should contain not less than 10% Sulphur 
when analysed by gravimetric method (Appendix -3.1.8). 
 
6.3.3 Sauvīrā ®jana in ore form should contain not less than 500 ppm 
Silver (Ag) when analysed by A. A. S. (Appendix -3.2.1). 
 6.4 Heavy metals and Arsenic: Sauvīrā
®jana in ore form should not contain 
more than the stated limits for the following: -  Arsenic = 2 ppm a nd 
Cadmium =  22 ppm (Appendix -3.2).          
 6.5 Other Elements: Sauvīrā
®jana in ore form may contain the following 
within ± 20% of the stated limits:-   Copper = 70 ppm, Gold = 0.10 ppm and 
Zinc = 20 ppm (Appendix -3.1 & 3.2). 
 
7.      Distinction from Śro tonjana: Cubic cleavage, greater Sp.Gravity and darker 
colour of Sauvīrā ®jana distinguish it from Śrot o®jana ( Sb2S3).   
 
8.    Śodhana: Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to ś odhana. 
  8.1     Śodhana:              [ Ref: AFI -Part-1; Ap pendix -II,  Śodhana -3] 
 
  i) A
®jana    : 1 part  
  ii) Bh ¨¬garāja drava  (Pl.)  : Q.S. for mardana  
  33   Method:  
Powder the A ®jana, add quantity sufficient bh ¨¬garāja drava (svarasa) and 
grind till the contents get dried completely.  
 
9. Sauvīrā ®jana has the fol lowing attributes:-  
 
 9.1 Properties and Actions:  
  Rasa   - Tikta, Ka ¾āya, Ka °u  
   Gu´a  - Snigdha  
  Vīrya   - Śīta 
   Vipāka  - Madhura  
   Karma  - Grāhī, Vra ´a Śodhana, Ropa ´a, Rajorodhaka  
       
9.2 Therapeutic Uses   
 
9.2.1. Śuddha Sauvīrā ®jana ( External): Netra Rog a (diseases of eye)  
 
9.2.2. Bhasma of Sauvīrā ®jana:  Raktapitta (bleeding disorder); vi ¾a do¾ a 
(disorders due to poison); Hikkā (hiccup); rajorodha (obstruction of 
menstrual flow); Raktapradara* (menorrhagia or m etrorrhagia or both)  
 
10. Dose:  60-125 mg of the bhasma 
 
*Precaution : It should not be used for more than three days in Raktapradara.  
 
11. Important Formulations: Irimedādi taila (for external use), Nayanām ¨tā®jana (for     
            external use).   34 SVAR ³A 
(Gold metal)  
 
1. Definition:  Svar´a (Au) i s a yellow metal available in the form of ingots.  
 
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta :  Hā°aka, Hema, Kanaka, Suvar ´a, Hira ´ya, Ka ®cana 
 
 2.2 Names in other Languages:  
  Bangali  - Sonā   
  English  - Gold  
   Gujarati  - Sonu 
  Hindi   - Sonā   
  Latin   - Aurum     
  Marathi  - Sone    
  Telugu  - Bangāram  
    
3. Broad Classification: Metal  
 
4. Origin and occurrence:  Svar´a is present in the earth's crust and in sea water to 
the extent of about 4 parts in a hundred million. Most of the Svar ´a that occurs in 
the earth's crust i s in the native state. It occurs in 2 types of deposits; (i) in 
hydrothermal veins and (ii) in placers. Svar ´a of hydrothermal origin occurs 
mostly in quartz veins, commonly with pyrite and other sulphides, and gold- silver 
telluride. The primary deposits of Svar´a occur in intrusive rocks having 
composition of diorite, quartz -diorite and granites and their metamorphic 
equivalents. Placers of Svar ´a occur as rounded or flattened grains and nuggets, in 
many cases in association with other heavy and resistant minerals. Large quantity 
of Svar´a is obtained from sulphides, with which it is probably mechanically 
mixed.  
 
  Svar´a occurs very widely diffused in nature, chiefly in the free state, but 
invariably alloyed with some proportion of Rajata or Tamra, and oc casionally with 
bismuth, mercury and other metals. Native Svar ´a has been known to contain as 
much as 99.80% gold (Au), but commonly contains 85- 95% Au, the balance being 
usually silver for the most part. The name electrum  is applied to natural Gold with 
20% or more Silver.    
   The purity or fineness of Svar
´a is expressed in carats or parts per thousand 
(1000). Gold containing 999.9 parts per thousand (i.e. 99.99 % Au) is termed as 24 
carat Gold. The 22 carat Gold (the standard for Gold coin and jewellar y) contains 
916.6 parts of gold and 83.4 parts of copper in thousand. That means, 22 carat Gold contains 91.66 % Au and 8.34 % Cu. 
 
   In India, the deposits of primary Svar
´a occur mainly in Hassan and 
Chitradurga districts in Karnataka, Chigargunta (Chit tor district) in Andhra Pradesh 
and Kozhikode and Cannore districts in Kerala. Occurrences of Svar ´a have  35 recently been discovered in the states of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh. Main 
producer of Svar ´a in country today are Hutti Gold Mines Co. Ltd. (HGML) and 
Hindustan Copper Ltd. (HCL) as by -product. It is available in market in the form of 
ingots.  
 
5. Physical properties: (Definition / explanation of technical terms and methods of 
determination as given in Appendix –1).  
  
 Nature  : Granular, dendrites an d nuggets  
 Colour  : Golden yellow  
  Streak  : Bright yellow           
 Cleavage  : None  
 Fracture  : Hackly  
 Lustre  : Metallic  
 Tenacity  : Very malleable and ductile 
 Transparency  : Opaque  
    Hardness      : 2.5 to 3.0 (readily scratched by knife)  
 Sp.Gr. : 19.30; varies from 15.6 to 18.3 when contains alloying elements like Silver or Copper   
 
6. Chemical Properties : 
  
6.1 Solubility:  Insoluble in any single acid ( hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid
 
or nitric acid ) but soluble in aqua -regia (HNO 3: HCl, 1:3)  
 
 6.2 Assay : Svar´a should contain not less than 99.99% Gold (Au) when 
 analysed by Atomic Absorption Spectorometer (Appendix -3.2.6 & 3.2.10). 
     
6.3  Heavy metals and Arsenic: In Svar´a Mercury, Lead, Arsenic and 
 Cadmium should be absent.  
 
7. Distinction fro m Svar ´amāk ¾ika and Vimal a 
 
7.1 Svar´amāk ¾ika and Vimal a both are brittle and soluble in nitric acid  which 
is not in the case of Svar ´a.  
 
7.2 Vimal a  has higher hardness (6- 6.5) compared to other two.  
 
7.3 The streak of Svar ´a is yellow  while Svar ´amāk ¾ika gives greenish black 
streak.  
  
8. Śodhana:  Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to śodhana .  
  
9. Svar´a is used in the form of bhasma, the details of which are given in the 
 monograph of bhasma.   36 SVAR ³AMĀK ½IKA  
(Copper Ore)  
 
1. Definitio n:  Svar ´amāk ¾ika is a copper ore containing Chalcopyrite (CuFeS 2)  
mineral.  
 
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta   :  Dhātumāk ¾ika, Māk ¾ika, Hemamāk ¾ika, Tāpya 
 
2.2 Names in other Languages :  
English           -   Chalcopyrite, Copper ore   
  Gujarati  - Māks īka, Sonāmā khī 
  Hindi  - Sonāmākhī, Sonāmakkhi, 
  Kannada  - Dhātumaks ika 
  Malayalam  - Makkirakallu  
  Marathi  - Daga ²ī, Sonāmukhī   
  Tamil  - Ponnimilai (S.F.I.)    
  Telugu  - Māks īkamu, Svar ´amakhi  
  Urdu  - Miss Sokhta (N.F.U.M.)  
 
3.      Broad classification:  Sulphide  
 
4. Origin and occurrence: Svar´amāk ¾ika, in ore form,  occurs mainly in 
metamorphic rocks of pre -cambrian age. Occurrence of 100% pure Svar ´amāk ¾ika 
in abundance is not common because it is always associated with host rock in the 
form of disseminations, streaks, stringers, patches, veins or lodes as fracture and 
cleavage fillings. Svar ´amāk ¾ika generally occurs in association with pyrrhotite, 
pyrite, sphalerite and galena minerals. Gold, Silver, Arsenic, Nickel and Cobalt in 
trace amounts, are always pres ent in Svar ´amāk ¾ika. 
 
  In India, large deposits of  Svar´amāk ¾ika occur  mainly in Khetri, Distt. 
Jhunjhunu in Rajasthan, Malanjkhand, Distt. Balagaht in Madhya Pradesh and 
Ghatsheela, Distt. Singhbhum in Jharkhand. Mining of  Svar´amāk ¾ika from these 
3 areas is carried out by Hindustan Copper Limited (A Govt. of India Enterprise). 
More than 90% production of this ore in the country comes from these areas only. Small deposits, however, occur in Chitradurga and Hassan in Karnataka, Kurnool and Guntur in Andhr a Pradesh and Rangpo in Sikkim.  
 
5.  Physical Properties : (Definition / explanation of technical terms and methods of 
determination as given in Appendix 1).   
 
 Nature  :  Massive, smooth  
 Colour  :  Golden yellow  
 Streak  :  Greenish black  
 Fracture  :  Uneven  
 Lustre  :  Metallic  
 Tenacity  :  Brittle   37  Transparency  :  Opaque  
 Hardness  :  3 to 4 
 Sp.Gr  :  3.4 to 3.7   
 
6.  Chemical Properties:  
 
6.1  Charcoal Test : When heated on charcoal, a fragment of Svar ´amāk ¾ika 
fuses to a black mass without swelling wh ich is strongly magnetic, as felt 
by a horse -shoe magnet (Appendix -3.4.4). 
 
6.2  Reaction with Acid: Take nitric acid  in a test tube. Heat to boil for 5 
minutes and cool to room temperature. Take 1 g of finely powdered sample 
in a dry test tube, add 10 ml of the nitric acid  to it  and heat. The solution 
becomes bluish black.  
 
6.3    Assay:  
6.3.1 Svar´amāk ¾ika in ore form should contain not less than 5% Copper 
(Cu) (Appendix -3.1.9 & 3.2.2). 
 
6.3.2 Svar´amāk ¾ika in ore form should contain not less than 20% Ir on 
and 12% Sulphur when analysed by gravimetric method (Appendix -
3.1).     
          
          6.4    Heavy metals and Arsenic: Svar ´amāk şika in ore form should contain not 
more than the stated limits for the following: -  Lead = 70 ppm, Arsenic = 1 
ppm and Cadmium = 3 ppm (Appendix -3.2).  
 6.5  Other Elements:  Svar
´amāk ¾ika in ore form may contain the following 
within ± 20% of the stated limits:-  Gold = 0.70 ppm, Silver = 48 ppm and 
Zinc = 800 ppm (Appendix -3.1 & 3.2). 
 
7.  Distinction from Vimala 
 
7.1  Golden ye llow colour and softer than Vimala (pyrite), which has hardness 6-
6.5. 
  
7.2   Svar ´amāk ¾ika: greenish black streak, Vimala : brownish black streak  
 
7.3   Copper content in Vimala  is negligible.  
 
8. Śodhana: Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to ś odhana . 
 
9.  Svar´amāk ¾ika is used in the form of bhasma, the details of which are given in the 
monograph of bhasma.  
   38 SVAR ³AMĀK ½IKA  -S¡NDRITA 
(Copper Concentrate)  
 
1. Definition:  Svar´amāk ¾ika-Sāndrita is a copper concentrate containing 
Chalcopyrite (CuF eS2) mineral with minimum 12 % copper content.  
(Svar´amāk ¾ika-Sāndrita, herein after, is referred as Sāndrita 
Svar´amāk ¾ika in the rest of the monograph ). 
 
2.      Broad classification:  Sulphide  
 
3.    Origin and occurrence: There is no natural occurrence of Sāndrita Svar ´amāk ¾ika 
in India or in the world. It is a processed material in the form of fine powder. Beneficiation is done by crushing and grinding of Svar
´amāk ¾ika and subjecting its 
slurry  to froth floation. It is important to note that even aft er processing, it retains its 
overall mineralogy as well as other properties. The only difference is increase in 
copper content to more than 12 %. There is a little increase in the content of other 
major ingredients also. Like Svar ´amāk ¾ika, it also contains trace but comparatively 
higher amount of Gold, Silver, Arsenic, Lead, Zinc, Nickel and Cobalt.  
 
   In India, large quantity of Sāndrita Svar ´amāk ¾ika is produced by 
Hindusthan Copper Limited at Khetri in Rajasthan, Malanjkhand in Madhya pradesh 
& Ghatsh eela in Jharkhand.  
 
 3.1     Preparation of Sandrit  Svar ´amāk ¾ika: 
   
 The Sāndrita Svar ´amāk ¾ika is produced by crushing and grinding of 
Svar´amāk ¾ika ore lumps to 200 mesh size powder. Substantial amount of 
water (@ 2.5 M3 per ton ne of ore ground) is ad ded during grinding of 
copper ore to make the material a slurry. This slurry is subjected to froth 
floation process, durin g which pine oil (@ 28 g per tonne  of ore ground) 
and sodium ethyl xanthate (@ 35 g per tonne  of ore ground) are added to 
the flotatio n cells. The pine oil acts as frother whereas sodium ethyl 
xanthate as collector. This process enriches the copper content of the slurry just by discarding the gangue material from it. The enriched slurry, which comes out of floatation cells as froth, is dried through hot air driers. The dried fine powder of 200 mesh size is termed as Concentrate and the 
process is called beneficiation.
 The minor amount of pine oil and sodium 
ethyl xanthate, which was added during floatation process, will totally go away du ring further processing (i.e.  śodhana) by the pharmacies. Hence, 
the material, which remains after ś odhana, will be nothing but  Sāndrita 
Svar
´amāk ¾ika containing higher content of its ingredients.   39 4.  Physical Properties : (Definition / explanation of tech nical terms and methods of 
determination as given in Appendix 1).  
  
 Nature  :  Fine powder  
 Colour  :  Greenish black with yellow tinch  
 Lustre  :  Dull-metallic  
 Sp.Gr  :  3.8 to 4.1   
 
5.  Chemical Properties:  
 
5.1  Charcoal Test : When heated on charcoal , Sāndrita Svar ´amāk ¾ika fuses to 
a black mass which is strongly magnetic, as felt by a horse -shoe magnet 
(Appendix -3.4.4). 
 
5.2  Reaction with Acid: Take nitric acid  in a test tube. Heat to boil for 5 
minutes and cool to room temperature. Take 1 g powder of Sāndrita 
Svar´amāk ¾ika in a dry test tube, add 10 ml of the nitric acid  to it  and heat. 
The solution becomes bluish black. 
 5.3    Assay :  
5.3.1 Sāndrita Svar
´amāk ¾ika should contain not less than 12% Copper 
(Cu) (Appendix -3.1.9 & 3.2.2).              
 
5.3.2 Sāndrita Svar ´amāk ¾ika should contain not less than 25% Iron and 
28% Sulphur when analysed by gravimetric method (Appendix -
3.1).   
          
5.4  Heavy metals and Arsenic: Sāndrita Svar ´amāk ¾ika should contain not 
more than the stated limits for the following: Arsenic = 100 ppm and 
Cadmium = 5 ppm (Appendix – 3.2).  
 
5.5  Other Elements: Sāndrita Svar´amāk ¾ika may contain the following 
within ± 20% of the stated limits:-  Gold = 0.40 ppm, Silver = 50 ppm and 
Zinc = 0.20% (Appendix -3.1 & 3.2).  
 
6.    Śodhana: Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to ś odhana . 
 
7.  Sāndrita Svar´amāk ¾ika is used in the form of bhasma, the details of which are 
given in the monograph of bhasma. 
 
 
  40 TĀMRA  
(Copper Metal)  
 
1. Definition:  Tāmra is the end produ ct of the metallurgical process of Copper ore. It 
is available in the form of wires, sheets or rods of Copper which is 
produced by an electrolytic process.  
 
2. Synonyms:  
2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta   :  Śulvaka, Śulva, Sūrya, Sūryasakhā,Tāmraka, Ravi  
 
 2.2 Names in other La nguages:  
  Bangali  - Tāmā  
  English  - Copper  
  Gujarati  - Trāmbu, Tāmbu  
  Hindi  - Tāmbā  
  Kannada  - Tāmbra  
  Latin  - Cuprum  
  Malayalam  - Chembu 
  Marathi  - Tāmbe    
  Tamil  - Chempu (S.F.I.)    
  Telugu  - Rāgi  
  Urdu  - Nuhas, Miss, Tāmba (N.F.U.M.)  
 
3. Broad Classification: Metal  
 4. Origin and occurrence:  Tāmra, in native form, occurs as irregular platy dendrites, 
crystals and compact mass and is most commonly associated with basic extrusive 
igneous rocks. Such occurrences are very limited. Electrolyticall y refined Tāmra  is 
produced mainly in smelter/ refinery plants at Khetri in Rajasthan and Maubhandar -Ghatsheela in Jharkhand, where Copper ore occurs in abundance. 
Native Tāmra  is comparatively less pure than electrolytically refined Copper, 
which contains  99.50% to 100% Cu. 
   Native Tāmra as well as electrolytically refined Copper generally contain 
trace amounts of Gold, Silver, Zinc, Arsenic, Iron, Bismuth and Antimony.    
5.  Physical properties: (Definition / explanation of technical terms and methods of determination as given in Appendix –1).  
 
 Nature  : Plates, wires or rods; can be bent by hand   
 Colour  : Copper red  
  Streak  : Copper red           
 Cleavage  : None  
 Fracture  : Hackly  
 Lustre  : Metallic  
 Tenacity  : Malleable  
 Transparency  : Opaque   41  Hardness  : 2.5 to 3.0 
 Sp. Gr. : 8 to 9  
  
6. Chemical Properties : 
 
6.1 Reaction with acids : Take about 5 g of finely powdered (150 mesh) Tāmra  
in a borosil test tube. Add 10 ml nitric acid . It gets completely dissolved in 
the acid giving a blue solution. A dd an excess of ammonia to this blue 
solution. The colour of solution changes to deep azure blue. 
  
 6.2 Assay : Tāmra  should contain not less than 99.5% Copper (Cu) 
 (Appendix -3.1.9 & 3.2.2).              
     
 6.3 Heavy metals and Arsenic: Tāmra  should not contain more than the stated 
limits for the following: - Lead = 5 ppm, Arsenic = 1 ppm and Cadmium = 
5 ppm (Appendix -3.2).  
 6.4 Other Elements:  May contain the following within ± 20% of the stated 
limits:-  Zinc = 25 ppm, Silver = 10 ppm and Gold = 135 ppb (Appendix -
3.1 & 3.2).    
 
7. Śodhana: Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to ś odhana . 
 
8.  Tāmra  is used in the form of bhasma, the details of which are given in the 
monograph of bhasma.  
   42 ¯A«KA³A 
(Borax)  
 
1. Definition:  ¯a¬ka´a is Bo rax mineral (Na 2B4O7, 10 H 2O), also known as Tincal .  
 
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta    :  ¯a¬ka´aka, ¯a¬ga, ¯a¬ka, Saubhāgya  
 
 2.2 Names in other Languages:  
  Bangali  - Sohāgā  
  English  - Borax, Tincal   
   Gujarati  - Ta¬kana Khāra, Khadiyo Khāra  
  Hindi   - Suhāgā  
  Kannad  - Biligāra, Belgār   
  Malayalam  - Pongaaram  
  Marathi  - Ta¬ka´a Khāra  
  Punjabi  - Sohāgā  
  Tamil   - Venkaram (S.F.I.)  
  Telugu  - Veligāram   
  Urdu   - Tankar, Suhaga (N.F.U.M.)   
 
3.  Broad Classification:   Borax ( Sodium borate)   
 
4. Origin a nd occurrence: ¯a¬ka´a occurs as deposits from volcanic emanations 
(fumaroles), hot springs and in dried up shallow basins (Playa) or saline lakes. It 
occurs mostly in the waters of various saline lakes in the salt deposits that have 
been formed through ev aporation of such lakes. The origin of ¯a¬ka´a involves 
simple concentration and evaporation, which is accompanied by some chemical and mineralogical transformations to give rise to 
¯a¬ka´a (borax). An evaporite 
mineral, it occurs associated with halites, sulphates, carbonates and other borates 
like ulexite and colemanite.  
 
Economically workable deposits of ¯a¬ka´a are not yet discovered in India, 
and the domestic need is met by imports of crude borates, which are refined to 
produce ¯a¬ka´a and boric acid. Small quantity of ¯a¬ka´a, since early times, 
however, was being obtained from salt lakes in Leh district of Jammu and Kashmir and Tibet, where it occurs today also. Non- exploitable occurrences of 
¯a¬ka´a are 
known in Surendranagar district in Gujarat and Jaipur and Nagaur districts in 
Rajasthan.  
 5.  Physical properties      :  (Definition / explanation of technical terms and methods of determination as given in Appendix –1).   
 
 Nature  :  Crystalline lumps                
 Colour  :  White                  
 Streak :  White        
 Cleavage  :  Poor          43  Fracture  :  Conchoidal         
 Lustre   :  Vitreous         
 Tenacity  :  Brittle                         
 Transparency  :  Translucent                    
   Hardness  :  2 to 2.5               
 Sp. Gr. :  1.65 to 1.7                
 Taste  :  Sweetish alkaline  
 
6.  Optical properties . 
   Biaxial, Negative, with η α, 1.447, η β, 1.469 and η γ, 1.472 (Appendix -2) 
 7.  Chemical Properties:  
  7.1  Effect of Heat:  
 
7.1.1  Heated on a burner flame using blowpipe, 
¯a¬ka´a bubbles up and 
fuses to a clear glassy bead.  
 7.1.2 It colours the flame yellow due to sodium and when moistened with sulphuric acid and alcohol, gives a green flame due to boron (Appendix -3.4.3). 
 7.2  Reaction with acids:  
 
7.2.1 With hydrochloric acid -  gives yellow colour solution in cold 
condition and on boiling dissolves completely.  
 
7.2.2  With sulphuric acid -  gives colourless solution in cold condition and 
on boiling dissolves completely.  
 
7.3  Solubility in water: 
¯a¬ka´a is completely soluble in pur ified water  
producing an alkaline solution as tested by a red litmus paper turning blue.  
 
 7.4  Assay:  
 
7.4.1 ¯a¬ka´a should contain not less than 35% B 2O3 (Boron trioxide) 
(Appendix -3.2.14). 
 
7.4.2 ¯a¬ka´a should contain not less than 15% Sodium (Na) (App endix -
3.2.13). 
  
7.5  Heavy metals and Arsenic: ¯a¬ka´a should not contain more than the 
stated limits for the following: -  Arsenic = 5 ppm and Cadmium = 4 ppm 
(Appendix -3.2). 
       
8. Śodhana:  Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to ś odhana. 
 
   44  8.1     Śodhana:        [Ref: AFI -Part-I; Appendix -II, Śodhana -19] 
 
  Method:  
  Prepare coarse powder of ¯a¬ka´a and fry over heat source, collect when 
completely dehydrated.  
 
9. ¯a¬ka´a has the following attributes:  
 
 9.1 Properties and Action s:  
  Rasa   - Ka°u  
  Gun a  - Rūk¾ a, U¾´a, Tīk¾´ a, Sāraka   
   Vīrya   - U¾´a 
   Vipāka  - Ka°u 
   Karma  - H¨dya, Balya, Sāraka, Kapha nissāraka, Dīpana,  
     Strī pu¾ pajanana, Mū² hagarbhapravartaka   
       
          9.2 Therapeutic Uses: Kāsa (cough); Śvāsa (Asthma ); Vāta roga (diseases due 
to Vāta do ¾a); Sthāvara vi ¾a (poisoning by plant or mineral); Ādhmāna 
(flatulence with gurgling sound); Vra ´a (wound/ulcer)   
 
10. Dose:  125 -  250 mg 
  
     11.   Important Formulations: Ānandabhairava rasa, Candrām ¨ta ra sa, Icchābhed ¤ rasa, 
Saubhāgya va °ī, Tribhuvanakīrti rasa.  
  45 TUTTHA  
(Copper Sulphate)  
 
1. Definition:  Tuttha is copper sulphate (Cu SO 4, 5H2O), also known as blue vitriol , 
copper vitriol, blue stone or chalcanthite mineral.  
   
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Sa¼sk¨ta     :  Tutthaka  
 
 2.2 Names in other Languages:  
  Bangali  - Tunte, Tuntiyā  
  English  - Copper Sulphate, Blue vitriol   
   Gujarati  - Morathuthu 
  Hindi   - Nīlā Thothā, Tūtiā  
  Kannada  - Mayuruthutha  
  Malayalam  - Mayilthuththam 
  Marathi  - Moracūda 
  Tamil   - Mayil thuththam, Turken (S.F.I.)  
  Telugu  - Mailu tuttham, Melatutu  
  Urdu   - Tutia, Kabood (N.F.U.M.)   
 
3. Broad Classification:   Hydrous cupric sulphate   
 
4. Origin and occurrence:  Tuttha occurs with other hydrated sulphates of copper 
and iron in the ox idized form near surface zones of copper sulphide ore deposits. It 
is found generally deposited with mine purified water s, often on the walls of 
abandoned mine workings. Also, it is found in the zones of weathering of Copper lodes.  
   In India, natural oc currence of Tuttha, in abundance, is uncommon. A little 
amount of Tuttha can be seen near copper mines in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh 
and Jharkhand. Mostly, commercially manufactured Tuttha as a chemical is used 
for Ayurvedic formulations in the country.  
 
5.  Physical properties:  (Definition  / explanation of technical terms and methods of 
determination as given in Appendix –1) . 
  Nature  :  Crystalline  lumps                
 Colour  :  Berlin or sky blue                  
 Streak  :  Colourless        
 Cleavage  :  Poor         
 Fracture  :  Conchoidal         
 Lustre   :  Vitreous         
 Tenacity  :  Brittle                         
 Transparency  :  Translucent                     
 Hardness  :  2 to 2.5               
 Sp. Gr. :  2.12 to 2.30 
    46 6.  Chemical Properties:  
       
 6.1  Effect of Heat:  
6.1.1 On heating, partially evaporates giving brownish mass . 
 
6.1.2 Heating with sodium carbonate  (Na 2CO 3) gives black fused mass . 
 
6.1.3 Heat  on charcoal with sodium carbonate  (Na2CO 3) and carbon, it 
yields metallic copper as observed by its co pper red colour.  
 
6.1.4 Heat  in closed tube, Tuttha gives off water , observed as droplets on 
the upper internal wall of the tube  (Appendix -3.4.5) . 
  6.2  Solubility in purified water : Take about 10 g accurately weighed fine (150 
mesh) powder of Tuttha in 250 ml beaker. Add 50 ml purified water  to it. 
Stir the solution till Tuttha  powder stops dissolving. Put the beaker in sun 
light till the  solution gets completely dried up. Weigh the residue, if any. It 
should not be more than 10% of the initial weight of  the sample.That is, 
solubility of Tuttha in purified water  should not be less than 90%.   
 
6.3 Assay: Tuttha should contain not less than 20% C opper  (Appendix -
 3.1.9 & 3.2.2) . 
        
6.4 Tuttha should contain not less than 15% S ulphur  and not less than 50% SO
4 
(Appendix -3.1 & 3.3) . 
          6.5  Heavy metals and Arsenic:  Tuttha should not contain more than the 
stated limits for the following : - Lead  = 226 ppm, Arsenic = 4 ppm and 
Cadmium  = 97 ppm  (Appendix -3.2).        
 
6.6      Other elements: May contain the following within ± 20% of the stated 
 limits:-  Iron 4 % when analysed by gravimetric  method ( Appendix -3.1.4) . 
 
7. Śodhana - Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it to ś odhana.  
 
7.1     Śodhana:    [Ref: AFI -Part-I; Appendix -II, Śodhana -21] 
   i) Tuttha   :  1 Part  
  ii) Rakta Candana kvātha    [Ht.Wd]  :  Q.S. for bhāvanā  
  iii) Ma ®ji¾°hā kvātha  [Rt.] :  Q.S. for bhāvanā  
  iv) Varā [Triphalā] kvātha   [P.] :  Q.S. for bhāvanā  
 
  Method:  
 Powder Tuttha, add quantity sufficient Rakta Candana Kvātha and grind 
till complete moisture gets evaporated. Repeat the process for seven times. 
The process of levigation is to be repeated in all other liquid media i.e. 
Ma
®ji¾°hā Kvātha and Varā Kvātha individually for seven times each.  
  47 8. Tuttha  has the fo llowing attributes : 
 
 Properties and Actions:  
 
          Rasa   - Ka°u, Ka ¾āya, Madhura   
          Gu ´a  - Laghu, S ara  
          Vīrya   - U¾´a, Śīta  
          Vipāka   - Ka°u  
Karma   -  Kaphapittahara, Lekhana, Bhedana, Balya,      
 Trido ¾aghna, Rasāyana, R ucikara, Vāmaka, Var ´ya,  
 Garavi ¾ahara, Śūlaghna, Cak¾ u¾ya, Aśmar īhara,  
 Ka´²ūghna, K ¾ārakarma kara, Arśoghna, K ¨mighna  
 
 8.2. Therapeutic Uses: K ¨mi ( helminthiasis /worm infestatio n); Prameha 
(increased frequency and turbidity of urine); Medoroga ( obesit y); Śūla 
(pain/colic); Ku ¾°ha (diseases of the skin); Śvāsa ( Asthma ); Amlapitta  
(hyperacidity);  Tvak roga ( skin disease);  Śvitra ( Leucoderma /Vitiligo ); 
Arśa ( piles); Vra ´a (ulcer/wound); Nā ²ī Vra´a (sinus); Netra roga ( disease s 
of  eyes); Du ¾°a vra´a  (non-healing ulcer)   
 
9. Dose: 15 -  30 mg  
 
10. Important Formulations: Jātyādi taila, Nityānanda rasa, Jātyādi gh¨ta, Mahā 
vi¾agarbha t aila, Kāsīsādi gh¨ta   48 VAIKRĀNTA  
(Tourmaline)  
 
1. Definition:  Vaikrānta is Tourmaline, s odium aluminium borosilicate of the  
formula [(Ca, Na)X (Mg, Al 6)X{B3 Al2 Si6X(O,OH) 30}] 
   
2. Synonyms:  
 2.1 Names in other Languages:  
  Bangali  - Cūniviśe ¾a 
  English  - Tourmaline  
   Gujarati  - Taramari  
  Hindi   - Turamuri  
  Marathi  - Turamali, Toramali   
  Telugu  - Vaikrantamu  
   
3.  Broad Classification: Complex ring silicate of b oron and a luminium.  
 4. Origin and occurrence:  Vaikrānta occurs in granite pe gatites,  commonly in radial 
crystal form. It also occurs in metamorphic rocks, mostly in schists and gneisses. 
Vaikrānta is a common det rital heavy mineral in s edimentary rocks. Vaikrānta is a 
wide  spread mineral and used also as a Gemstone.  
 
  In India, it occurs in igneous and metamorphic terrains of Rajasthan, 
Jharkhand, Bihar and Karnataka. In Rajasthan, it mainly occurs in Udaipur, 
Bhilwara, Ajmer and Rajsamand districts.  Vaikranta may be found associated with 
topaz, spodumene, cassiterite, fluorite and apatite.   
 
5. Physical properties:  (Definition  / explanation of technical terms and methods of 
determination as given in Appendix –1) . 
  Nature  :  Crystalline prismatic                
 Colour  :  Black                  
 Streak  :  Colourless        
 Cleavage  :  None, prismatic faces strongly striated vertically   and 
crystals rounded to barrel shaped    
 Fracture  :  Uneven         
 Lustre   :  Vitreous         
 Tenacity  :   Brittle and often rather friable                           
 Transparency  :  Translucent                      
 Hardness  :  7 to 7.5                  
 Sp. Gr.  :  3 to 3.2 
            
6.  Optical properties :                  
Uniaxial, negative, η
o 1.65 to 1.69, η e 1.63 to 1.66, strong birefringence; dichroism 
present, as seen in parallel polarized light (uncrossed), with change in colour when 
a fragent is oriented at two positions, right angle to each other, by rotating the st age 
of microscope  (Appendix -2).   49 7.  Chemical Properties:  
 
       7.1  Effect of Heat:  
7.1.1 Pyroelectricity - When heated at one end, Vaikrānta crystal attracts 
small bits of papers at the other end.  
  Heated before blowpipe, Vaikrānta swells up and does not  fuse 
easily . 
 
7.2   Reaction with acids: Vaikrānta does not decompose by  any acid.  
  
 7.3  Assay:  
7.3.1 Vaikrānta should contain not less than 6% B
2O3 when analysed by  
ICPA  method ( Appendix -3.2.14) . 
 
7.3.2 Vaikrānta should contain not less than 12 % ferric  oxide  (Fe2O3), 
not less than 30% Alumina (Al2O3) and not less than 30% Silica 
(SiO 2) when analysed by gravimetric  method ( Appendix -3.1). 
 
7.4  Heavy metals and Arsenic:  Vaikrānta should not contain more than the 
stated limits for the following : - Lead  = 11 ppm , Arsenic = 4 ppm and 
Cadmium  = 2 ppm  (Appendix -3.2). 
 8. Śodhana: Shall not be used in formulations without subjecting it  to śodhana .  
 
9.  Vaikrānta is used in the form of bhasma, the details of which are given in the 
 monograph of bhasma.  
   50 BLA NK PAGE   228   
                   
 
 
APPENDICES  
 
  229  230 APPENDIX- 1 
 
1.1 APPARATUS FOR TESTS AND ASSAYS  
 
1.1.1 - Nessler Cylinders  
 
Nessler cylinders which are used for comparative tests are matched tubes of clear colourless glass 
with a uniform internal diameter and flat, tr ansparent base. They comply with Indian Standard 4161- 1967. 
They are of transparent glass with a nominal capacity of 50 ml. The overall height is about 150 mm, the 
external height to the 50 ml mark 110 to 124 mm, the thickness of the wall 1.0 to 1.5 mm and the thickness 
of the base 1.5 to 3.0 mm. The external height to the 50 ml mark of the cylinder used for a test must not vary 
by more than 1 mm.  
 1.1.2. - Sieves  
 
 Sieves for pharmacopoeial testing are constructed from wire cloth with square meshes, woven f rom 
wire of brass, bronze, stainless steel or any other suitable material. The wires should be of uniform circular 
cross -section and should not be coated or plated. There must be no reaction between the material of the sieve 
and the substance being sifted.  
 
Sieves conform to the following specifications –  
 
Approximate sieve number* Nominal mesh aperture size  Tolerance average aperture size 
     mm           ± mm  
 
 4    4.0            0.13  
 6    2.8            0.09  
 8    2.0            0.07  
 10    1.7            0.06  
 12    1.4            0.05  
 16    1.0            0.03  
 --    µm            ±µm  
 22              710                25    
 25              600                21  
 30              500                18  
 36              425                15  
        44               355                13  
            60               250           3(9.9) **  
 85              180           11(7.6)  
 100              150           9.4(6.6)  
 120              125           8.1(5.8)  
 150              106           7.4(5.2)  
 170     90          6.6(4.6)  
 200    75          6.1(4.1)  
 240    63          5.3(3.7)  
 300    53          4.8(3.4)  
 350    45          4.8(3.1)  
 
  * Sieve  number is the number of meshes in a length of 2.54 cm. in each transverse direction parallel to the 
wires.  
 
** Fig ures in brackets refer to close tolerances, those without brackets relate to full tolerances.  
  231  
1.1.3. - Thermometers  
 
Unless otherwise specified, thermometers suitable for pharmacopoeial tests conform to 
Indian Standard 4825- 1968 and are standardised in accordance with the ‘Indian Standard Method of 
Calibrating Liquid -in-Glass Thermometers’, 6274 -1971. 
   The thermometers are of the mercury -in-glass type and are filled with a dried inert gas, 
preferably nitrogen. They may be standardised for total immersi on or for partial immersion. Each 
thermometer should be employed according to the condition of immersion under which it was standardised. In the selection of the thermometer it is essential to consider the conditions under which it is to be used.   
1.1.4. –Ultra -Violet Lamp (For general purposes and for chromatography work)  
 
 An instrument consisting of mercury vapour lamp and a filter which gives an emission band 
with maximum intensity at about 254 nm (near UV rays) and 366 nm (far UV rays) is used. To 
ensure that the required emission is being given by the lamp, carry out the following test 
periodically.   
Apply to a plate coated with silica gel G, 5 μl of a 0.04 per cent w/v solution of  sodium  
salicylate in ethanol (95%) for lamps of maximum output at 254 nm and 5 μl of a 0.2 per cent w/v 
solution in ethanol (95%) for lamp s of maximum output at 365 nm. Examine the spot in a position 
normal to the radiation. The distance between the lamp and the plate under examination used in a 
pharmacopoeial test should not exceed the distance used to carry out the above test.  
  1.1.5. - Volumetric Glassware 
 
Volumetric apparatus is normally calibrated at 27
0. However, the temperature generally 
specified for measurements of volume in the analytical operations of the pharmac opoeia, unless 
otherwise stated, is 250. The discrepancy is inconsequential as long as the room temperature in the 
laboratory is reasonably constant and is around 270. 
 Pharmacopoeial assays involving volumetric measurements require the use of accurately 
calibrated glassware. Volumetric apparatus must be suitably designed to assure accuracy. The 
design, construction and capacity of volumetric glassware should be in accordance with those laid down by the Bureau of Indian Standards . The tolerances on capacity  for volumetric flasks, pipettes 
and burettes, as laid down in the relevant Indian Standards, are permisibile.  
  1.1.6. - Weights and Balances  
 
 Pharmacopoeial tests and assays require the use of analytical balances that vary in capacity, 
sensitivity and r eproducibility. The accuracy needed for a weighing should dictate the type of 
balance. Where substances are to be “accurately weighed”, the weighing is to be performed so as to 
limit the error to not more than 0.1 per cent. For example, a quantity of 50 mg  is to be weighed to 
the nearest 0.05 mg; a quantity of 0.1 g is to be weighed to the nearest 0.1 mg; and quantity of 10 g is to be weighed to the nearest 10 mg. A balance should be chosen such that the value of three times the standard deviation of the re producibility of the balance, divided by the amount to be weighed, 
does not exceed 0.001.  
  232 1.1.7. - Muslin Cloth  
 
 Muslin cloth is a cotton fabric where warp is 22 per cm±1 and w eft is 18 ±1 per centimeter.  
 
Method: Take a cardboard or an aluminium plate wi th a centimeter square opening. Keep the plate 
on the cloth to be used, so that the edges on the X or  Y axis coincides with a warp or weft yarn in 
the fabric.Count the number of the thr eads of both warp and weft within the opening.  
         233 APPENDIX -  2 
 
2.1 TESTS  AND DETERMINATIONS  
 
2.1.1. -  Microscopic Identification  
 
 Microscopic identification of the botanical ingredients is a standard for statutory purposes in 
several solid and semi -solid compound formulations. Microscopic identification tests are conf ined 
to those formulations where the botanical ingredients are not more than ten , and where they are 
added ‘in situ’  in powder form as ‘ Praksepa Dravy ¢s’. Such comminuted ingredients lend 
themselves for microscopic identification, as they are not drastically changed in cell structure or 
contents while processing, and appear intact in microscopic slide preparations, after proper treatment.  
  Appropriate processing for separation and isolation of botanical debris from a formulation 
without loss of debris, by hand picking, shifting, washing, sedimentation, density separation or by 
floatation etc., are the preliminary steps. This is followed by clearing the debris in chemical reagents, reacting it with suitable reagents and stains and finally mounting a little p art on a slide in 
a medium of suitable refractive index (see later part) that helps to show the unit structures in good relief.  Identification of the discrete, but disoriented units from the botanical ingredients in a formulation will not be possible with out proper isolation, and should not be attempted.  
  Monographs where the test is prescribed give both a relevant method of isolation and 
diagnostic features specific to the expected ingredients in that formulation.  Only a brief method and a few of the ch aracteristics for each ingredient are given, but an analyst may use other methods 
of isolation and choose more characteristics to draw a correct conclusion.  
  Although monographs prescribe standards only for the ‘ Praksepa Dravyas’, characteristics 
from oth er ingredients that are processed into extracts or decoctions prior to their addition to a 
formulation may also be seen in a slide preparation, giving rise to recognisable unique characteristics. In addition, cell or tissue structures common to several ing redients added to a 
formulation, and therefore not specific to any one of them, would also be present. Caution should therefore be exercised so that such features are not construed as parts from adulterants or substitutes or foreign parts.  Proper study of  the individual ingredients using authentic material and reference 
to their monographs in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia for Single Drugs would help avoid errors of this nature.  Skill in the recognition of discrete and disoriented tissue components and the knowledge required to ascribe them to their correct source should be acquired by the analyst.  
 Stains and Reagents for Microchemical Reactions  
  
The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia volumes on single drugs already include microchemical reactions for ergastic substan ces and may be consulted in addition to the following for use on isolated debris:  
 Acetic acid:  Dilute 6 ml of glacial acetic acid with 100 ml of distilled water; used for identification 
of cystoliths, which dissolve with effervescence.  
 Aniline chloride  solution:  Dissolve 2 g in a mixture of 65 ml of 30 per cent ethyl alcohol and 15 
ml distilled water and add 2 ml of conc. Hydrochloric acid.  Lignified tissues are stained bright yellow.  
 Bismarck brown:  Dissolve 1 g in 100 ml of 95 per cent of ethyl alcohol; used as a general stain 
for macerated material (with Schultze’s).  
  234 Breamer’s reagent:  Dissolve 1 g of sodium tungstate and 2 g of sodium acetate in sufficient 
quantity of water to make 10 ml yellowish to brown precipitates; indicate the presence of tannin. 
   Chlorinated soda solution (Bleaching s olution):  Dissolve 75 g of sodium carbonate in 125 ml of 
distilled water; triturate 50 g of chlorinated lime (bleaching powder) in a mortar with 75 ml of distilled water, adding it little by little.  Mix the two  liquids and shake occasionally for three or four 
hours.  Filter and store, protected from light.  Used for lighting highly coloured material, by warming in it and washing the tissues thoroughly.  Canada balsam (as a Mountant):  Heat Canada balsam on a water bath until volatile matter is 
removed and the residue sets to a hard mass on cooling.  Dissolve residue in xylene to form a thin syrupy liquid.  Use d for making permanent mounts of reference slides of selected debris.  
 Chloral hydrate s olution:  Dissolve 50 g of chloral hydrate in 20 ml of distilled water.  A valuable 
clarifying agent for rendering tissues transparent and clear, by freeing them from most of the ergastic substances, but leaving calcium oxalate crystals unaffected.  Chloral iodine:  Saturate chloral hydrate solution with iodine, leaving a few crystals undissolved; 
useful for detecting minute grains of starch otherwise undetectable.  
 Chlorziniciodine (Iodinated z inc chloride  solution): Dissolve 20 g of zinc chloride and 6.5 g of 
potassium iodi de in 10 ml of distilled water.  Add 0.5 g of iodine and shake for about fifteen 
minutes before filtering.  Dilute if needed prior to use.  Renders cellulosic walls bluish violet and lignified walls  yellowish brown to brown.  
 Chromic acid s olution:  10 g of  dissolved in 90 ml of dilute sulphuric acid:  macerating agent 
similar to Schultze’s.  
 Corallin s oda:  Dissolve 5 g of corallin in 100 ml of 90 per cent ethyl alcohol.  Dissolve 25 g of 
sodium carbonate in 100 ml distilled water; keep the solutions separat e and mix when required, by 
adding 1 ml of the corallin solution to 20 ml of the aqueous sodium carbonate solution.  Prepare fresh each time, as the mixture will not keep for long.  Used for staining sieve plates and callus bright pink and imparts a reddis h tinge to starch grains and lignified tissues. 
 Ammoniacal solution of Copper oxide (Cuoxam):  Triturate 0.5 g of copper carbonate in a mortar 
with 10 ml of distilled water and gradually add 10 ml of strong solution of ammonia (sp. gr. 0.880) with continue d stirring; used for dissolving cellulosic materials.   
 Eosin:  1 per cent solution in 90 per cent ethyl alcohol; stains cellulose and aleurone grains red. 
 
Ferric chloride  solution: A per cent solution ferric chloride in distilled water.  Taninn containing 
tissues coloured bluish or greenish black.  
 
Glycerin:  Pure or diluted as required with one or two volumes of distilled water.  Used as a 
general mountant.  Haematoxylin, Delafield’s:  Prepare a saturated solution of ammonia alum.  To 100 ml of this add 
a solution of 1 g of Haematoxylin in 6 ml of ethyl alcohol (97 per cent).  Leave the mixed solution 
exposed to air and light in an unstopped bottle for three or four days.  Filter and add to the filtrate 25 ml of glycerin and 25 ml of methyl alcohol.  Allow the solution to stand exposed to light, till it acquires a dark colour (about two months).  Refilter and store as a stock solution.  Dilute it 3 or 4 times volumes with distilled water.  Stains cellulosic fibers blue; used only on water washed 
material.   235  
Iodine water:  Mix 1 volume of decinormal iodine with 4 volumes of distilled water.  Stains starch 
blue, and reveals crystalloids and globoids when present in aleurone grains.  Iodine and Potassium iodide s olution:  Dissolve 1 g of potassium iodide  in 200 ml of distilled 
water and 2 g of iodine; stains lignified walls yellow and cellulosic walls blue.  
 Lactophenol (Amman’s Fluid):  Phenol  20 g, lactic acid  20 g, glycerin  40 g, distilled water  20 ml 
dissolve; reveals starch grains in polarised light with a well marked cross at hilum, and also 
minute crystals of calcium oxalate as brightly polarising points of light.  
 Methylene blue:  A solution in 25 ml of ethyl alcohol  (95 per cent). A general stain for nucleus and 
bacteria.  Millon’ s reagent: Dissolve 1 volume  of mercury in 9 volumes of fuming nitric acid (sp. Gr. 1.52), 
keeping the mixture well cooled during reaction. Add equal volume distilled water when cool. Stains proteins red.  Naphthol s olution : Dissolve 10 g of Naphthol in 100 ml of ethyl alcohol ; a speci fic stain for 
detection of inulin; cells containing inulin turn deep reddish violet.  
 Pholorglucinol:  1 g of phloroglucinol  dissolved in 100 ml of 90 per cent ethyl alcohol ; mount 
debris in a few drops, allow to react for a minute, draw off excess of reage nt with a filter paper 
strip, and add a drop of conc. hydrochloric acid to the slide; lignified tissues acquire a deep 
purplish red colour; very effective on water washed material but not in chloral hydrate washed debris.  Picric acid s olution (Trinitrophe nol Solution):  A saturated aqueous solution made by dissolving 
1 g of picric acid in 95 ml of distilled water; stains animal and insect tissues, a light to deep yellow; in a solution with ethyl alcohol, aleurone grains and fungal hyphae are stained yellow.  Potash, Caustic:  A 5 per cent aqueous solution ; used  to separate tenacious tissues of epidermis 
and also laticiferous elements and vittae, both of which are stained brown.  Ruthenium red: Dissolve 0.008 g of ruthenium red in 10 ml of a 10 per cent soluti on of lead 
acetate; ( to be freshly prepared ) used for identification of most kinds of mucilage containing tissues, 
which turn pink. A 0.0008 g ruthenium red dissolved in 10 ml of distilled water and used immediately stains cuticular tissues in debris to a light pink . 
 Safranin: A 1 per cent solution in ethyl alcohol 50 per cent ; used to stain lignified cell walls deep 
red, even after clearing with choral hydrate.  Schultze’s Maceration f luid:  Add isolated debris to 50 per cent conc. nitric acid  in a  test t ube and 
warm over water  bath: add a few crystals of potassium chlorate  while warming, till tissues soften; 
cool, wash with water thoroughly and tease out for mounting hard tissues; isolated cell structures are clearly revealed, but the structures are not useful for measurement of dimensions . 
 Sudan Red III:  Dissolve 0.01 g of sudan red III in 5 ml of ethyl alcohol  (90 per cent) and 5 ml of 
pure glycerin ; suberised walls of cork cells, and fatty material in cells are stained bright red.. 
 Sulphovanadic acid (Mandelin’s reagent):  Triturate 1 g of ammonium vandate with 100 ml conc. 
sulphuric acid.  Allow the deposit to subside and use the clear liquid.  This is to be prepared fresh;   236 useful for identification of alkaloids, particularly strychnine which turns vi olet in the cells 
containing it.  
 
 Refractive Indices of Certain Mountants  
 
Water  1.333  
Lactophenol  1.444  
Chloral Hydrate solution  1.44 to 1.48  
Olive oil  1.46 to 1.47  
Glycerol  1.473  
Castor oil  1.48 
Clove oil  1.53 
Cresol  1.53 
Cassia oil  1.6 
Xylol  1.49 
Alcohol  1.36 
Chloroform  1.44 
 
 2.1.2. Microscopical Methods of Examining Crude Vegetable Drugs  
 
Methods of preparing specimens of crude materials of vegetable drugs for microscopical 
studies vary, depending on the morphological groups of drugs to b e examined and also on the 
natures of the material i.e., entire, cut or powdered.  
I. LEAVES, HERBS AND FLOWERS  
 
For examining leaves, herbs and flowers (entire or cut) under microscope, following 
methods are employed for clarification: 
 
A. Entire and cut mat erials  
 
(i) Entire materials  – When examining entire leaves, herbs and flowers, take pieces of leaf 
(margin and vein of leaves only), herbs (only leaf) and flowers (only calyx and corolla) in test tube. 
Add a solution of caustic alkali or nitric acid to th e test tube and boil for 1- 2 minutes, pour the 
contents into a porcelain dish, drain off the liquid, wash the material with water and leave for sometimes. Remove the pieces of the material from the water with a spatula and put on the slide, add a few drops  of the solution of glycerol or chloral hydrate. Crush the material with scalpel and 
cover with cover slip before examining.  
 
(ii) Cut materials  – For examining cut leaves, herbs and flowers, take several pieces in a 
test tube and employ the same methods a s described for entire materials.  
 
Other methods employed for clarification of the material (leaf and stem) are described 
below : - 
 
(a) Leaf  – Boil pieces of leaves in a test tube with chloral hydrate for several minutes until 
completely clarified and then  examine them in chloral hydrate solution. After clarification, leaf 
pieces are divided into two parts with the help of a scalpel or needle, and carefully turn one part. The leaf can be examined from both the dorsal and ventral surfaces.  
 
(b) Stem  – To examine stem material (without leaf) boil pieces in a solution of caustic alkali 
or in nitric acid. Remove the epidermis with a scalpel or a needle for examining the surface. For  237 examining pressed specimen of stem, take separate tissue and press them with a s calpel on the 
slide.  
 
B. Powder  
 
For examining characters of the powder take sufficient amount of powder in Chloral -
hydrate solution on a slide and cover it with a cover slip, warm over a low flame for a short time. 
 
II. FRUITS AND SEEDS  
 A. Entire materials  
 
For microscopical examination of fruit and seed take the specimens or outer coat of 
seed or fruit and examine as described below :  
 
(i) Outer Coat  – For examining the outer coat boil 3 or 4 seeds or fruits in caustic alkali 
solution in a test tube for 1- 2 min utes (outer coat specimens with intensive pigmentation are boiled 
for longer period). After boiling, place the pieces on slide, remove the layers of the coat and examine them after mounting in glycerol solution.  
 
(ii) Section  – If fruits or seeds are too h ard to cut then boil them for 15 -30 minutes or more 
depending on their hardness or keep them in moistening chamber or absorb in water and chloroform solution or soften them with stem and then cut the specimen for examining purpose. For cutting small, flat seeds (which are difficult to hold) place them in a pith or potato slit for section cutting. Small, round or smooth seeds cannot be cut into section in the pith, then in such cases, they may be embedded in paraffin wax blocks for section cutting. For this, a block of paraffin (0.6 × 0.5 
× 1.5 cms. in size) is made and the seed is embedded in the block by making a cavity or a pit in the block with a hot teasing needle. Cut the section with a sharp razor (through the object) together with the paraffin, place them on to the slide, remove paraffin with a needle or wash it with xylene and examine the section in chloral -hydrate solution. 
 
B. Powder  
 
For examining the structure of the cells of the seed coat and the cells of the embryo take a small 
amount of powder of the material on a slide in glycerol and cover it with a cover slip and examine.  
 
1. Starch  – For examining the presence of starch in the seed, take two specimens, one in iodine 
solution and the other in water. With iodine solution starch turns blue. Shape and the structure of starch grains can be seen in water and their size is measured.  
  When examining objects containing starch, prepare specimen by slightly warming in 
chloral -hydrate solution. 
 2. Fixed Oil  – For examining the presence of fixed oil, prepa re a specimen in a solution of Sudan 
III droplets of fixed oil are coloured orange pink. When examining objects containing small amount of fixed oil, prepare a specimen by slightly warming in chloral -hydrate solution, and when 
examining objects containing large amount of fixed oil, then the powder is de -fatted and clarified as 
follows:  
 
Place 0.5 g. of the powder in a porcelain dish, add 5- 10 ml. of dilute nitric acid  
and boil for 1 minute, then strain off the liquid through a cloth, wash the residue with hot water and return it to the porcelain dish with a spatula, boil it with 5 -10 ml of caustic alkali solution for 1 
minute and again strain it through the cloth and wash with water. Examine the residue in a glycerol  238 solution, after the treatment the structu re of the layers of the coat and their cells can be seen very 
distinctly.  
 
3. Mucilage  – Prepare a specimen in Ruthenium Red and examine it under a low power microscope 
or under dissecting microscope. Mucilage appears as pinkish- red or yellow coloured mass es. 
 
III. BARKS  
 
A. Entire material  
 
Prepare transverse or longitudinal section of bark. To soften bark break it into pieces of 
about 1- 2 cm long and 0.5- 1 cm wide and boil with in a test tube for 1- 3 minutes. Soft pieces are 
then straightened with a scalp el so as to have a exact transverse or longitudinal direction. Cut the 
section with razor, moisten the surface of the bark with glycerol solution. Remove the sections with a brush and place them on the slide. Thin pieces of the bark are cut by placing them  in the pith 
(potato or carrot). The sections are treated with various reagents before examining.  1. Lignified elements  – For testing lignin add several drops of phloroglucinol and a drop of 
concentrated hydrochloric acid to the section on a slide then dr aw off the liquid, immerse the 
section in chloral hydrate solution and cover with a cover slip (the specimen should not be heated); the lignified elements are coloured crimson. Phloroglucinol can be substituted by saffranine, and the lignified elements are  coloured pink. The excessive stain can be washed out with acidified 
alcohol.  2. Starch  – Starch is detected by treating with iodine solution.  
 3. Tannin  –Tannin is detected by treating with ferric ammonium sulphate solution (blue -black or 
green black col our shows the presence of Tannin) or with potassium -bichromate solution (brown 
colour indicates the presence of Tannin).  
 4. Anthraquinone derivatives  –Anthraquinone derivatives are detected by treating with alkali 
solution (blood- red colour shows the pres ence of  anthraquinone derivatives). 
 
B. Cut materials  
 
Prepare small pieces or scraping of bark and boil them for 3- 5 minutes in a solution of caustic 
alkali or potassium hydroxide or in nitric acid solution and then mount in glycerin for examination 
on a sl ide covered with a cover slip.  
 
C. Powder  
 
Prepare specimen for examination by placing a little amount of powder on a slide, add 1 -2 
drops of phloroglucinol and a drop of concentrated hydrochloric acid, cover it with a cover slip, 
draw off the liquid from one  side of the slide with filter paper, and then apply 1- 2 drops of chloral -
hydrate solution from the other side of the slide, lignified elements are stained crimson- red. 
Specimen may also be prepared with caustic alkali or ferric ammonium sulphate for this purpose.  
 IV. ROOTS AND RHIZOMES  
 
A. Entire materials  
 
For anatomical examination of entire roots and rhizomes cut transverse and longitudinal 
sections. For this, soften small pieces of roots without heating in glycerol solution for 1- 3 days,  239 depending on the ir hardness. The softened roots are straightened with the help of a scalpel in the 
right direction and then cut a section with the razor. First, cut thicker entire slices and then make 
thin, smaller sections. Stain the entire slices with phloroglucinol and  concentrated hydrochloric acid 
or with safranin examine the specimen under a dissecting microscope. For micro- chemical test the 
small and thin sections are examined under microscope, as follows:  
 1. Starch  – Starch is detected with iodine solution. For th is, prepare specimen with water to 
measure the granule of starch with an occular micrometer.  
 2. Inulin –Inulin is detected with Molish’s reagent. For this place a little powder on a slide and 
apply 1- 2 drops of naphthol and a drop of concentrated sulphuri c acid, if inulin is present, the 
powder will appear reddish- violet coloured. Starch also gives this test, so the test for inulin can be 
done in the absence of starch.  
 
3. Lignified elements  –Lignified elements (fibrovascular bundles, mechanical tissue etc.) are 
detected with phloroglucinol and concentrated hydrochloric acid or safranine solution as mentioned 
above for barks.  
 
4. Fixed oil  –For fixed oil detection use Sudan IV, as mentioned above for fruits and seeds.  
 
If required for tannin, anthraquinone derivatives test as mentioned above.  
 
B. Cut material  
 Make small pieces or scrapping of roots or rhizomes and boil them for 3 -5 minutes in caustic 
alkali, or in nitric acid and then make pressed specimen and immerse them in glycerol.  
 
Microchemical tests can  be performed with scrapings for various chemicals as mentioned 
above.  
 
C. Powder  
 Prepare several specimens of the powder on slides in chloral hydrate solution and perform the 
above mentioned standard tests for detection of starch, fixed oil, inulin, lignifi ed elements, 
anthraquinone derivatives, tannins, mucilage, etc.  
 
2.1.3. Types of Stomata  
 
There are several types of stomata, distinguished by the form and arrangement of the 
surrounding cells. The following descriptions apply to mature stomata.  
 
1. Anomoc ytic (irregular- celled)  –Previously known as ranunculaceous. The stoma is surrounded 
by a varying number of cells in no way differing form those of the epidermis generally.  
 2. Anisocytic (unequal -celled)  –Previously known as cruciferous or  solanaceous. T he stoma is 
usually surrounded by three subsidiary cells, of which one is markedly smaller than the others.  
 3. Diacytic (cross -celled)  –previously known as caryophyllaceous. The stoma is accompanied by 
two subsidiary cells whose common wall is at right an gles to the guard cells.  
 4. Paracytic (parallel -celled)  –Previously known as rubiaceous. The stoma has one each side one 
or more subsidiary cells parallel to the long axis of the pore and guard cells. 
  240 2.1.4. Determination of Stomatal Index 
 
The stomatal index is the percentage of the number of stomata formed by the total number 
of epidermal cells, including the stomata, each stoma being counted as one cell.  
 
Place leaf fragments of about 5 × 5 mm in size in a test tube containing about 5 ml of 
chloral hyd rate solution and heat in a boiling water -bath for about 15 minutes or until the fragments 
become transparent. Transfer a fragment to a microscopic slide and prepare the mount, the lower epidermis uppermost, in chloral hydrate solution and put a small drop  of glycerol -ethanol solution 
on one side of the cover -glass to prevent the preparation from drying. Examine with a 40x objective 
and a 6x eye piece, to which a microscopical drawing apparatus is attached. Mark on the drawing paper a cross (x) for each epi dermal cell and a circle (o) for each stoma. Calculate the result as 
follows:  
                                  S x 100 Stomatal index = ——————                                  E + S  
Where  S = the number of stomata in a given area of leaf ; and  
 E = the n umber of epidermal cells (including trichomes) in the same area of leaf.  
 
 
                       
 
 
                                       Fig. 1 Various types of stomata  
 For each sample of leaf make not fewer than ten determinations and calculate the av erage index.  
 
2.1.5. Determination of Palisade Ratio  
 
Palisade ratio is the average number of palisade cells under one epidermal cell.  
 
Place leaf fragments of about 5 × 5 mm in size in a test -tube containing about 5 ml of 
chloral hydrate solution and heat  in a boiling water -bath for about 15 minutes or until the fragments 
become transparent. Transfer a fragment to a microscopical slide and prepare the mount of the upper epidermis in chloral hydrate solution and put a small drop of glycerol solution on one side of the cover -glass to prevent the preparation from drying. Examine with a 40x objective and a 6x eye 
piece, to which a microscopical drawing apparatus is attached. Trace four adjacent epidermal cells on paper; focus gently downward to bring the palisa de into view and trace sufficient palisade cells 
to cover the area of the outlines of the four epidermal cells. Count the palisade cells under the four  241 epidermal cells. Where a cell is intersected, include it in the count only when more than half of it is 
within the area of the epidermal cells. Calculate the average number of palisade cells beneath one epidermal cell, dividing the count by 4; this is the“Palisade ratio” (See Fig. 2).  
 
For each sample of leaf make not fewer than ten determinations and calcul ate 
the average number.  
 
                                             
 
 
                                                                               18.4                                        Fig. 2 Palisade ratio=  ——— = 4.5                                                                                4  
2.1.6. Determination of Vein -Islet Number  
 
The mesophyll of a leaf is divided into small portions of photosynthetic tissue by 
anastomosis of the veins and veinlets; such small portions or areas are te rmed “Vein -Islets”. The 
number of vein- islets per square millimeter is termed the “Vein -Islet number”. This value has been 
shown to be constant for any given species and, for full -grown leaves, to be unaffected by the age 
of the plant or the size of the le aves. The vein- islet number has proved useful for the critical 
distinction of certain nearly related species. The determination is carried out as follows : 
 For Whole or Cut leaves  –-Take pieces of leaf lamina with an area of not less than 4 square 
millime ters from the central portion of the lamina and excluding the midrib and the margin of the 
leaf. Clear the pieces of lamina by heating in a test tube containing chloral hydrate solution on a boiling water -bath for 30 to 60 minutes or until clear and prepar e a mount in glycerol -solution or, if 
desired, stain with safranin solution and prepare the mount in Canada Balsam. Place the stage micrometer on the microscope stage and examine with 4x objective and a 6x eye piece. Draw a line representing 2 mm on a shee t of paper by means of a microscopical drawing apparatus and 
construct a square on the line representing an area of 4 square millimeters. Move the paper so that the square is seen in the centre of the field of the eyepiece. Place the slide with the cleared  leaf 
piece on the microscope stage and draw in the veins and veinlets included within the square, completing the outlines of those vein- islets which overlap two adjacent sides of the square. Count 
the number of vein- islets within the square including thos e overlapping on two adjacent sides and 
excluding those intersected by the other two sides. The result obtained is the number of vein- islets 
in 4 square millimeters. For each sample of leaf make not fewer than three determinations and calculate the average number of vein- islets per square millimeter.  
 For Leaf Fragments having an area less than 4 square millimeters  – Take fragments of leaf 
lamina each with an area of not less than 1 square millimeter, excluding the midrib and the margin of the leaf. Clear and prepare a mount as stated above. Use a 10x objective and a 6x eyepiece and  242 draw a line representing 1 mm on a sheet of paper by means of a microscopial drawing apparatus 
and construct a square on this line representing an area of 1 square millimetre. Ca rry out the rest of 
the procedure as stated above. The result obtained is the number of vein- islets in 1 square 
millimetre. For each sample of leaf make no less than 12 determinations and calculate the average number.  
2.1.7. Determination of Stomatal Numb er 
 
Place leaf fragments of about 5x5 mm in size in a test tube containing about 5 ml of chloral 
hydrate solution and heat in a boiling water -bath for about 15 minutes or until the fragments 
become transparent. Transfer a fragments to a microscopic slide and prepare the mount the lower 
epidermis uppermost, in chloral hydrate solution and put a small drop of glycerol -ethanol solution 
on one side of the cover glass to prevent the preparation from drying. Examine with a 40 x objective and a 6x eye piece, to wh ich a microscopical drawing apparatus is attached. Mark on the 
drawing paper a cross (x) for each stomata and calculate the average number of stomata per square millimeter for each surface of the leaf.  
 2.2. - DETERMINATION OF QUANTITATIVE DATA 
 2.2.1. -  Net Content  
 
            The content of the final or retail pack shall not be less than 98 percent of the declared net 
content.  
2.2.2. -  Foreign Matter  
 
            The sample shall be free from visible signs of mold growth, slimine ss, stones, rodent 
excreta, insects or any other noxious foreign matter when examined as given below.  
 
Take a representative portion from a large container, or remove the e ntire contents of the 
packing if  100 g or less, and spread in a thin layer in a suitable dish or tray. Exam ine in daylight 
with unaided eye.Transfer suspected particles, if any, to a petri dish, and exami ne with 10x lens in 
daylight.  
 
2.2.3. -  Determination of Total Ash  
 
 Incinerate about 2 to 3 g accurately weighed, of the ground drug in a tared platinum or si lica 
dish at a temperature not exceeding 450
0 until free from carbon, cool and weigh. If a carbon free 
ash cannot be obtained in this way, exhaust the charred mass with hot water, collect the residue on 
an ashless filter paper, incinerate the residue and f ilter paper, add the filtrate, evaporate to dryness, 
and ignite at a temperature not exceeding 4500. Calculate the percentage of ash with reference to 
the air -dried drug.  
 
2.2.4. -  Determination of Acid  Insoluble Ash  
 
 To the crucible containing total ash, add 25 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid. Collect the 
insoluble matter on an ashless filter  paper  (Whatman 41) and wash with hot water until the filtrate 
is neutral. Transfer the filter paper containing the insoluble matter to the original crucible, dry on a  
hot-plate and ignite to constant weight. Allow the residue to cool in a suitable desiccator for 30 
minutes and weigh without delay. Calculate the content of acid- insoluble ash with reference to the 
air-dried drug.  
 
  243 2.2.5. -  Determination of Water  Soluble  Ash  
 
 Boil the ash for 5 minutes with 25 ml of water; collect insoluble matter in a Gooch crucible 
or on an ashless filter paper, wash with hot water, and ignite for 15 minutes at a temperature not 
exceeding 4500. Subtract the weight of the insoluble matt er from the weight of the ash; the 
difference in weight represents the water -soluble ash. Calculate the percentage of water -soluble ash 
with reference to the air -dried drug.  
 
2.2.6. -  Determination of Sulphated Ash  
 
 Heat a silica or platinum crucible to r edness for 10 minutes, allow to cool in a  desiccator 
and weigh. Put 1 to 2 g of the substance, accurately weighed, into the crucible, ignite gently at first, 
until the substance is thoroughly charred. Cool, moisten the residue with 1 ml of sulphuric acid, 
heat gently until white fumes are no longer evolved and ignite at 8000 ± 250 until all black particles 
have disappeared. Conduct the ignition in a place protected from air currents. Allow the crucible to cool, add a few drops of sulphuric acid and heat. Ignite as before, allow to cool and weigh. Repeat the operation until two successive weighing do not differ by more than 0.5 mg.  
 
2.2.7. -  Determination of Alcohol Soluble Extractive  
 
 Macerate 5 g of the air dried drug, coarsely powdered, with 100 ml of a lcohol the specified 
strength in a closed flask for twenty -four hours, shaking frequent ly during six hours and allow  to 
stand for eighteen hours. Filter rapidly, taking precautions against loss of solvent, evaporate 25 ml 
of the filtrate to dryness in a tare d flat bottomed shallow dish, and dry at 105
0, to constant weight 
and weigh. Calculate the percentage of alcohol -soluble extractive with reference to the air -dried 
drug.  
 
2.2.8. -  Determination of Water  Soluble Extractive  
 
 Proceed as directed for the determination of a lcohol -soluble extractive, using chloroform -
water  instead of ethanol.  
 
2.2.9. -  Determination of Ether Soluble Extractive (Fixed Oil Content)  
 
 Transfer a suitably weighed quantity (depending on the fixed oil content) of the air -dried, 
crushe d drug to an extraction thimble, extract with s olvent ether (or petroleum  ether, b.p. 400 to 
600) in a continuous extraction apparatus (Soxhlet extractor) for 6 hours. Filter the extract 
quantitatively into a tared evaporating dish and evaporate off the solvent on a water bath. Dry the 
residue at 1050 to constant weight. Calculate the percentage of ether -soluble extractive with 
reference to the air -dried drug.  
 2.2.10. -  Determination of Moisture Content (Loss on Drying)  
 
 Procedure set forth here determine s the amount of volatile matter (i.e., water drying off 
from the drug). For substances appearing to contain water as the only volatile constituent, the 
procedure given below, is appropriately used.  
  Place about 10 g of drug (without preliminary drying) af ter accurately weighing (accurately 
weighed to within 0.01 g) it in a tared evaporating dish. For example, for unground or unpowderd drug, prepare about 10 g of the sample by cutting shredding so that the parts are about 3 mm in thickness.   244  Seeds and frui ts, smaller than 3 mm should be cracked. Avoid the use of high speed mills in 
preparing the samples, and exercise care that no appreciable amount of moisture is lost during 
preparation and that the portion taken is representative of the official sample. Af ter placing the 
above said amount of the drug in the tared evaporating dish, dry at 1050 for 5 hours, and weigh. 
Continue the drying and weighing at one hour interval until difference between two successive weighing corresponds to not more than 0.25 per ce nt. Constant weight is reached when two 
consecutive weighing after drying for 30 minutes and cooling for 30 minutes in a desiccator, show not more than 0.01 g difference.  
 2.2.11. -  Determination of Water I nsoluble M atter  
 
Take 10 gm of sample, add 200 ml hot distilled H2O and bring to boiling. Allow to cool to room 
temperature. Filter through a tared  gooch crucible having a bed of asbestos or sintered glass filter 
Wash  the residue with hot water till the filtrate is sugar -free (perform  Molisch test). Dry the gooch 
crucible or sintered glass filter at 135  20 C and weigh. Express as % insoluble matter.  
(Ref : - I.S.I Handbook of Food Analysis (Part II) – 1984 page10)  
 2.2.12. -  Determination of Volatile Oil in Drugs  
 
 The determination of volatile oil in a dru g is made by distilling the drug with a mixture of  
water and glycerin, collecting the distillate in a graduated tube in which the aqueous portion of the 
distillate is automatically separated and returned to the distilling flask, and measuring the volume of  
the oil. The content of the volatile oil is expressed as a percentage v/w.  
 
 The apparatus consists of the following parts ( see Fig. 1). The clevenger’s apparatus 
described below is recommended but any similar apparatus may be used provided that it permits  
complete distillation of the volatile oil. All glass parts of the apparatus should be made of good quality resistance glass.  
 
 
Fig.1 Apparatus for volatile oil determination 
  245 The apparatus is cleaned before each distillation by was hing successively with acetone and 
water,  then inverting it, filling it with chromic sulphuric acid mixture, after closing the open end at 
G, and allowing to stand, and finally rinsing with water.  
 
 Method of determination  
 
 A suitable quantity of the coar sely powdered drug together with 75 ml of glycerin  and 175 
ml of water in the one litre distilling flask, and a few pieces of porous earthen ware and one filter 
paper 15 cm cut into small strips, 7 to 12 mm wide, are also put in the distilling flask, which is then 
connected to the still head. Before attaching the condenser, water is run into the graduated receiver, 
keeping the tap T open until the water overflows, at P. Any air bubbles in the rubber tubing a —b 
are carefully removed by pressing the tube. The tap is then closed and the condenser attached. The 
contents of the flask are now heated and stirred by frequent agitation until ebullition commences. The distillation is continued at a rate, which keeps the lower end of the condenser cool. The flask is rotated occasionally to wash down any material that adheres to its sides.  
  At the end of the specified time (3 to 4 hours) heating is discontinued, the apparatus is 
allowed to cool for 10 minutes and the tap T is opened and the tube L
1 lowered slowly; as so on as 
the layer of the oil completely enters into the graduated part of the receiver the tap is closed and the volume is read.  
  The tube L
1 is then raised till the level of water in it is above the level of B, when the tap T 
is slowly opened to return the  oil to the bulb. The distillation is again continued for another hour 
and the volume of oil is again read, after cooling the apparatus as before. If necessary, the distillation is again continued until successive readings of the volatile oil do not differ . 
  The measured yield of volatile oil is taken to be the content of volatile oil in the drug. The 
dimensions of the apparatus may be suitably modified in case of necessity.  
 2.2.13. -  Special Processes Used in Alkaloidal Assays  
 2.2.13.a -  Continuous extr action of drug 
 
 Where continuous extraction of a drug of any other substance is recommended in the 
monograph, the process consists of percolating it with suitable solvent at a temperature 
approximately that of the boiling point of the solvent. Any apparat us that permits the uniform 
percolation of the drug and the continuous flow of the vapour of the solvent around the percolator may be used. The type commonly known as the Soxhlet apparatus  (see fig.  2) is suitable for this 
purpose.  
 
2.2.13.b -  Tests for co mplete extraction of alkaloids  
 
 Complete extraction is indicated by the following tests:  
 When extracting with an aqueous or alcoholic liquid  - After extracting at least three 
times with the liquid, add to a few drops of the next portion, after acidifying  with 2 N hydrochloric 
acid if necessary, 0.05 ml of potassium mercuri -iodide solution or for solanaceous alkaloids 0.05 
ml of potassium iodobismuthate solution; no precipitate or turbidity, is produced.  
 
When extracting with an immiscible solvent  - After extracting at least three times with 
the solvent, add to 1 to 2 ml of the next portion 1 to 2 ml of 0.1 N hydrochloric acid, remove the 
organic solvent by evaporation, transfer the aqueous residue to a test tube, and add 0.05 ml of  246 potassium mercuri -iodide  solution for solanaceous alkaloids 0.05 ml of potassium iodobismuthate 
solution or for emetine, 0.05 ml of iodine solution; not more than a very faint opalescenece is 
produced.  
 
 
 
Fig. 2 - Apparatus for the continuous extraction of  Drugs  (Soxhlet apparatus)  
 
2.2.14. -  Thin -Layer Chromatography (TLC)  
 
 Thin -layer chromatography is a technique in which a solute undergoes distribution between 
two phases, stationary phase acting through adsorption and a mobile phase in the form of a liquid. 
The adsorbent is a relatively thin, uniform layer of dry finely powdered material applied to a glass, plastic or metal sheet or plate. Precoated  plates are most commonly used. Separation may also be 
achieved on the basis of partition or a combination of partition and adsorption, depending on the particular type of support, its preparation and its use with different solvent.    Identification can be effected by observation of spots of identical R
f value and about equal 
magnitude obtained, respectively, with an unknown and a reference sample chromatographed on the same plate. A visual comparison of the size and intensity of the spots usually serves for semi -
quantitative estimation.  
  247  
 Apparatus  
 
(a) Flat glass plates of appropriate dimensions which allow the application at specified points of the necessary quantities of the solution being examined and appropriate reference solutions and which allow accommodation of the specified migration path-length. The plates are prepared as described below; alternatively, commercially prepared 
plates may be used.  
 (b) An aligning tray or a flat surface on which the plates can be aligned and rested when the coating substance is applied.  
 
(c) The adsorbent or coating substance consisting of finely divided adsorbent materials, normall y 5 µm to 40 µm in diameter is suitable for chromatography. It can be applied 
directly to the plate or can be bonded to the plate by means of plaster of paris (Hydrated Calcium Sulphate) or with any other suitable binders. The adsorbent may contain fluores cing material to help in visualising spots that absorb ultra -violet light.  
 
(d) A spreader which, when moved over the glass plate, will apply a uniform layer of adsorbent of desired thickness over the entire surface of the plate.  
 
(e) A storage rack to support the  plates during drying and transportation.  
 
(f) A developing chamber that can accommodate one or more plates and can be properly closed and sealed. The chamber is fitted with a plate support rack that supports the plates, back to back, with lid of the chamber in place.  
 
(g) Graduated micro -pipettes capable of delivering microlitre quantities say 10 µl and less.  
 
(h) A reagent sprayer that will emit a fine spray and will not itself be attacked by the reagent.  
 
(i) An ultra-violet light, suitable for observation at sh ort (2 54 nm) and long (365 nm) ultra -
violet wavelengths.  
 
Preparation of plates  
                  
                  U nless otherwise specified in the monograph, the plates are prepared in the following 
manner. Prepare a suspension of the coating substance in acc ordance with the instructions of the 
supplier and, using the spreading device designed for the purpose, spread a uniform layer of the 
suspension, 0.20 to 0.30 mm thick, on a flat glass plate 20 cm long. Allow the coated plates to dry in air, heat at 100
0 to 1050 for at least 1 hour (except in the case of plates prepared with cellulose 
when heating for 10 minutes is normally sufficient) and allow to cool, protected from moisture. Store the plates protected from moisture and use within 3 days of preparation. At the time of use, dry the plates again, if necessary, as prescribed in the monographs. Now a days pre coated plates of silica gel on glass/aluminium/ plastic sheets are also available.  
 
Method  
 
 Unless unsaturated conditions are prescribed, prepare the t ank by lining the walls with 
sheets of filter paper; pour into the tank, saturating the filter paper in the process, sufficient of the 
mobile phase to form a layer of solvent 5 to 10 mm deep, close the tank and allow to stand for 1  248 hour at room temperature . Remove a narrow strip of the coating substance, about 5 mm wide, from 
the vertical sides of the plate. Apply the solutions being examined in the form of circular spots 
about 2 to 6 mm in diameter, or in the form of bands (10 to 20 mm x 2 to 6 mm unless otherwise specified) on a line parallel with, and 20 mm from, one end of the plate, and not nearer than 20 mm to the sides; the spots should be 15 mm apart. If necessary, the solutions may be applied in portions, drying between applications. Mark the sides of the plate 15 cm, or the distance specified in the monograph, from the starting line. Allow the solvent to evaporate and place the plate in the tank, ensuring that it is as nearly vertical as possible and that the spots or bands are above the level of th e mobile phase. Close the tank and allow to stand at room temperature, until the mobile phase 
has ascended to the marked line. Remove the plate and dry and visualise as directed in the monograph; where a spraying technique is prescribed it is essential tha t the reagent be evenly 
applied as a fine spray.  
 For two -dimensional chromatography dry the plate after the first development and carry out 
the second development in a direction perpendicular to the first.  
 When the method prescribed in the monograph spe cifies ‘protected from light’ or ‘in 
subdued light’ it is intended that the entire procedure is carried out under these conditions.  
Visualisation  
 
 The phrases ultra -violet light (254 nm) and ultra -violet light (365 nm)  indicate that the plate 
should be e xamined under an ultra -violet light having a maximum output at about 254 or at about 
365 nm, as the case may be.   The term secondary spot  means any spot other than the principal spot. Similarly, a 
secondary band is any band other than the principal band.  
 R
f Value  
 
 Measure and record the distance of each spot from the point of its application and calculate 
the Rf value by dividing the distance travelled by the spots by the distance travelled by the front of 
the mobile phase.  
 
2.2.15. -  Starch E stimation ( Mont Gomery, 1957) [Spectrophotometric method]  
  Prepare 10 per cent homogenate of the plant tissue in 80 per cent ethanol . Centrifuge at 
2000 rpm for 15 minutes. To the residue thus obtained, add 4 ml of distilled water , heat on a water 
bath for 15 minute s and macerate with the help of glass rod. To each of the samples, add 3 ml of 52 
per cent  perchloric acid  and centrifuge at 2000 rpm for 15 minutes. The supernatant thus obtained 
is made upto known volume (generally upto 10 ml or depending on the expected concentration of 
starch). Take 0.1 ml aliquot, add 0.1 ml of 80 per cent phenol  and 5 ml conc. s ulphuric acid,  cool 
and then read the absorbance at 490 nm.  
 2.2.16. -  Sugar E stimation (Mont Gomery, 1957) [Spectrophotometric Method]  
 
            Prepare 10  per cent homogenate of the plant tissue in 80 per cent ethanol . Centrifuge at   
2000 rpm for 15 minutes. The supernatant obtained is made upto known volume (generally upto 10 
ml or depending on the expected concentration of sugar). Take 0.1 ml aliquot, add 0.1 ml of 80 per 
cent phenol and 5 ml conc. sulphuric acid, cool and then read the absorbance at 490 nm. 
   
  249 2.2.17. -  Fatty O il  Estimation  
 
 To estimate fatty oils, extract accurately weighed air -dried powdered plant material with 
petroleum ether  (40-600) in a Soxhlet apparatus. Dry the extract over anhydrous sodium sulphate  
and remove the solvent under vacuum at 400. Weigh the residue and calculate the percentage with 
reference to the weight of plant material used.  
 
2.2.18. -  Test for Argemone O il (Must ard Oil)  
 Take 2 -3 drops of the oil in a dry test tube and mix successively with one drop of liquid 
phenol and 2- 4 ml of conc. Sulphuric acid and shake. A deep red colour develops with in 10- 20 
seconds if argemone oil is present as adulterant.  
 2.2.19. -  Test for the Presence of Cottonseed oil (Halphen Test)  
 
 Take about 5ml of  the oil in a test tube and add equal amount of Sulphur solution (1% 
solution of Sulphur in carbon disulphide and then add an equal volume of amyl alcohol). Mix 
thoroughly by shaking and heating gently in a water bath (70- 80º) for a few minutes with 
occasional shaking until the carbon disulphide has boiled off and the sample stops foaming. Place 
the tube in an oil bath or a saturated brine bath maintained at 110 to 115º, and hold for 1 to 2 hours. 
A red colour at the end of this period indicates the presence of cottonseed oil. This test is sensitive 
to the extent of 0.5 percent of cottonseed oil in other oils.     2.2.20. -  Test for Clove Oil -Alkali- Soluble M atter  
 Place 80 ml of a 5 p er cent w/v solution of potassium hydroxide in a 150- ml flask with a 
long neck, which is graduated in tenths of an ml and is of such diameter that not less than 15cm in length has a capacity of 10ml. The flask before use is cleaned with Sulphuric acid and well rinsed with water. Add 10ml of the oil, cleared by filtration if necessary, and shake thoroughly at five -
minute intervals for half an hour, at ambient temperature. Raise the undissolved portion of the oil into the graduated part of the neck of the fla sk by gradual addition of more of the potassium 
hydroxide solution; allow standing for not less than twenty -four hours, and read off the volume of 
the undissolved portion of the oil. The undissolved portion of the oil measures not less than 1.0 ml and not more than 1.5 ml. 
2.2.21. -  Test for Eucalyptus O il 
 
Determination of Cineole  
 
 Into a stout -walled test tube, about 15 mm in diameter and 80 mm in length place 3 g, 
accurately weighed, of the oil preciously dried by shaking with anhydrous calcium chloride  
together with 2.1 g, accurately weighed, of melted o- cresol. Insert a thermometer, graduated in 
fifths of a degree, and stir the mixture well in order to induce crystallization; note the highest reading of the thermometer. Warm three tube gently, until the contents are completely melted, insert the tube through a bored cork into a wide -mouthed bottle which is to act as an air jacked; 
allow to cool slowly, until crystallization commences, or until the temperature has fallen to the point previously noted. St ir the contents of the tube vigorously with the thermometer, running the 
latter on the side of the tube with an up and down motion in order to induce rapid crystallisatiojn’ continue the string and rubbing a long as the temperature rises. Take the highest point as the freezing point.   Remelt the mixture and repeat the determination of the freezing point until two consecutive 
concordant results are obtained, because the first temperature noted is always lower than the true freezing point. 
  250  Find the percent age w/w of cineole corresponding to the freezing -point from the table, 
obtaining intermediate value, by interpolation (Table 2 .1). 
 
                                                                    Table 2 .1 
 
Freezing -Point  Percent 
w/w of 
Cineole  Freezin g – point  Percent 
w/w of 
Cineole  
240 . . . 45.6 300 . . . 53.4 
250 . . . 46.9 310 . . . 54.7 
260 . . . 48.2 320 . . . 56.0 
270 . . . 49.5 330 . . . 57.3 
280 . . . 50.8 340 . . . 58.6 
290 . . . 53.1 350 . . . 59.9 
360 . . . 61.2 470 . . . 80.0 
370 . . . 62.5 480 . . . 82.1 
380 . . . 63.8 490 . . . 84.2 
390 . . . 65.2 500 . . . 86.3 
400 . . . 66.8 510 . . . 88.8 
410 . . . 68.6 520 . . . 91.3 
420 . . . 70.5 530 . . . 93.8 
430 . . . 72.3 540 . . . 96.3 
440 . . . 74.2 550 . . . 99.3 
450 . . . 76.1 55. 20 . . . 100.0  
460 . . . 78.0  . . .  
 The o-cresol used must be pure and dry with a freezing- point not below 300. It is 
hygroscopic, and should be stored in a small welt -stoppered bottle because the presence of moisture 
may lower the results, even  to the extent of 5 per cent. 
 2.2.22.-  Determination of Acidity  
 
Reagents  
 
(1) Standard Sodium Hydroxide solution – 0.05 N  
(2) Phenolpthalein indicator – Dissolve 0.5 gm Phenolpthalein in 100 ml of  
50% ethyl alcohol (v/v)  
 
Procedure  
 
Take 10 gm of the sa mple in a suitable titration flask and dissolve in 75 ml  of carbon dioxide free 
water. Mix thoroughly. Titrate against standard  sodium hydroxide solution using 4- 6 drops of 
phenolpthalein indicator till  pink colour persists for 10 seconds.  
 
Determine blank  on water and indicator and correct the volume of sodium  hydroxide solution used. 
         251  
Calculation  
 
Acidity as formic acid (%) by weight = 0.23 X V  
          M  
Where V = corrected volume of 0.05 N sod. Hydroxide used 
M = weight in gm of the sample take n for test  
 
 
2.2.23. –Protein E stimation (Lowry et. al  1951)  
 
 Homogenise 100 mg plant metarial with 3  ml of 10% t richloroacetic acid . Centrifuge the 
homogenate at 10,000 rpm. Discard the supernatant. Treat the pallets obtained after centrifugation 
with 3  ml 1N sodium hydroxide , heat on water bath for 7  minutes and cool. Centrifuge the solution 
again for five to ten minutes at 5000 rpm. To 0.5 ml of supernatant thus obtained after 
centrifugation, add 5 ml reagent containing 100 parts of 2% solution of sodium carbonate and one part of 2% solution of sodium potassium  tartrate. Allow it so stand for ten to fifteen minutes. Then 
add 5 ml Folin and Ciocalteu’s  Phenol reagent (diluted with distilled water in ratio of 1:1) and 
allow to stand for half -hour for devel opment of colour and then finally measure the absorbance at 
700 nm.   
2.2.24. -  Method for Alkaloid E stimation  
 
 Macerate the plant material with 2 per cent acetic acid in water, filter and concentrate the 
filtrate under reduced pressure at 45
0 to one thir d of the original volume. Adjust the pH to 2 by 4 M 
hydrochloric acid. The yellow precipitate will be separated from the soluti on (A). Dissolve in it 0.1 
M to give solution (B). Add Mayer's reagent  to the solution A and B to give precipitate of alkaloid -
Mayers reagent complex. Dissolve it again in acetone - methanol - water  (6 : 2 : 10) to give 
solution. Pass this complex finally through Amberlite IRA 400 anion exchange resin (500 g) to give 
an aqueous solution of alkaloid chlorides.  
 
2.2.25. -Determinatio n of Esters – Boil a convenient quantity of alcohol (90%) thoroughly to 
expel CO 2 and neutralize it to solution of phenolphthalein. Dissolve about 2 g of the oil or ester, 
accurately weighed, in 5 ml of the neutralized alcohol contained in a hard glass flask, and neutralize 
the free acid in the solution with N/10 alcoholic KOH, using 0.2 ml of solution of phenolphthalein as indicator. Add 20 ml of N/2 alcoholic KOH, attach the flask to a reflux condenser, boil on a water bath for 1 hour, and immediately tit rate the excess of alkali with N/2 H
2SO 4, using a further 
0.5 ml of solution of phenolphthalein as indicator. Repeat the operation without the oil or ester. The difference between the titrations is equivalent to the alkali required to saponify the esters.  
  Each ml of N/2 alcoholic KOH is equivalent to - 
 
0.0981 g  of  Bornyl Acetate  
0.0364 g  of  Grlyceryl Triacetate  
0.0981 g  of  Linalyl Acetate  
0.0991 g  of  Menthyl Acetate  
0.0761 g  of  Menthyl Salicylate  
 
   252  
2.3. -  LIMIT TESTS  
 
Table 2.2 -  Permissi ble L imits of H eavy M etals  
 
S.No.     Heavy Metal contents                                 Permissible limits  
1.            Lead                                                              10 ppm  
2             Arsenic                                                           3 ppm  
3.            Cadmium                                                     0.3 ppm  
4.            Mercury                                                          1 ppm  
 
 
2.3.1. -  Limit Test for Arsenic 
 
In the limit test for arse nic, the amount of arsenic is expressed as arsenic, As   ppm  
 
Apparatus  
 
 A wide -mouthed bottle capable of holding about 120 ml is fitted with a rubber bung through 
which passes a glass tube. The latter, made from ordinary glass tubing, has a total length of 200 mm 
and an internal diameter of exactly 6.5 mm (external diameter about 8 mm). It is drawn out at one end to a diameter of about 1 mm and a hole not less than 2 mm in diameter is blown in the side of the tube, near the constricted part. When the bung  is inserted in the bottle containing 70 ml of 
liquid, the constricted end of the tube is above the surface of the liquid, and the hole in the side is below the bottom of the bung. The upper end of the tube is cut off square, and is either slightly rounded or ground smooth. 
 
 Two rubber bungs (about 25 mm x 25 mm), each with a hole bored centrally and true, 
exactly 6.5 mm in diameter, are fitted with a rubber band or spring clip for holding them tightly together. Alternatively the two bungs may be replaced by any suitable contrivance satisfying the conditions described under the General Test.  
 Reagents  
 
Ammonium oxalate AsT: Ammonium oxalate  which complies with the following additional test: 
 Heat 5 g with 15 ml of water,  5 ml of nitric acid AsT, and 10 ml of sulphuric acid AsT in 
narrow necked, round- bottomed flask until frothing ceases, cool, and apply the General Test; no 
visible stain is produced. 
 
Arsenic solution, dilute, AsT:  
  
Strong Arsenic solution AsT  1 ml 
Water  sufficient to produce                      100 ml  
Dilute arsenic solution, AsT must be freshly prepared.  
1 ml contains 0.01 mg of arsenic, as. 
 
Arsenic solution, strong, AsT:  
  Arsenic trioxide              0.132 g 
 Hydrochloric acid                  50 ml  
Water  sufficient to produce               100 ml  
   253 Brominated hydrochloric acid AsT:  
 
 Bromine solution AsT            1 ml 
 Hydrochloric acid AsT              100 ml  
 
Bromine solution AsT:  
 
 Bromine                                                                                        30 g 
 Potassium bromide                    30 g 
 Water  sufficient to produce                             100 ml  
 
It complies with the following test:  
 
 Evaporate 10 ml on a water -bath nearly to dryness, add 50 ml of purified water, 10 ml of 
hydrochloric acid AsT  and sufficient stannous chloride solution AsT to reduce the remaining 
bromine and apply the General Test; the stain produced is not deeper than 1 ml standard stain, showing that the proportion of arsenic present does not exceed 1 part per million.  
 Citric acid AsT: Citric acid which complies with the following additional tests: Dissolve 10 g in 50 ml of water add 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid AsT  and apply the General Test; no visible 
stain is produced.  
 Hydrochloric acid AsT:  Hydrochloric acid dilute d with water  to contain about 32 per cent w/w of 
hydrochloride acid and complying with the following additional tests:  
(i) Dilute 10 ml with sufficient water to produce 50 ml, add 5 ml of ammonium thiocyanate solution and stir immediately; no colour is produc ed. 
(ii) To 50 ml add 0.2 ml of bromine solution AsT, evaporate on a water -bath until 
reduced to 16 ml adding more bromine solution AsT, if necessary, in order that an excess, as indicated by the colour, may be present throughout the evaporation; add 50 ml of w ater and 5 drops of stannous chloride solution AsT, and apply the General 
Test; the stain produced is not deeper than a 0.2 ml standard stain prepared with the same acid, showing that the proportion of arsenic present does not exceed 0.05 part per million.  
Hydrochloric acid (constant -boiling composition) AsT :  Boil hydrochloric acid AsT to constant 
boiling Composition in the presence of  hydrazine hydrate , using 1 ml of 10 per cent w/v solution 
in water  per litre of the acid.  
 *Mercuric Chloride P aper:  Smooth white filter paper, not less than 25 mm in width, soaked in a 
saturated solution of mercuric chloride, pressed to remove superfluous solution, and dried at about 
60
0, in the dark. The grade of the filter paper is such that the weight is between 65 and 120 g per sq. 
mm; the thickness in mm of 400 papers is approximately equal numerically, to the weight in g per sq. mm. Nitric acid AsT:  Nitric acid which complies with the following additional test: 
 Heat 20 ml in a porcelain dish with 2 ml of sulphuric aci d AsT,  until white fumes are given 
off. Cool, add 2 ml of water, and again heat until white fumes are given off; cool, add 50 ml of water and 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid AsT, and apply the General Test; no visible stain is produced.  
-------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
*N
OTE –Murcuric chloride paper should be stored in a stoppered bottle in the dark. Paper which 
has been exposed to sunlight or to the vapour of ammoni a affords a lighter stain or no stain at all 
when employed in the limit test for arsenic. 254   
  
Potassium chlorate AsT:  Potassium chlorate which complies with the following additional test:  
 
Mix 5 g in the cold with 20 ml of water and 22 ml of hydrochloric acid AsT; when the first 
reaction has subsided, heat gently to expel chlorine, remove the last traces with a few drops of stannous chloride solution AsT, add 20 ml of water, and apply the General Test; no visible stain is 
produced.  
 
Potassium iodide AsT:  Potassium iodide which complies with the following additional test: 
 
Dissolve 10 g in 25 ml of hydrochloric acid AsT and 35 ml of water,  add 2 drops of 
stannous chloride solution AsT  and apply the General Test; no visible stain is produced.  
 
Sodium carbonate , anhydrous AsT:  Anhydrous sodium carbonate which complies with the 
following additional test: 
 Dissolve 5 g in 50 ml of water, add 20 ml of brominated hydrochloric acid AsT, remove the 
excess of bromine with a few drops of stannous chloride solution AsT, and apply the General Test; no visible stain is produced. 
 
Sodium Salicylate: Of the Indian Pharmacopoeia.  
 
Stannated hydrochloric acid AsT:  
 Stannous chloride solution AsT         1 ml  
Hydrochloric Acid AsT                 100 ml  
 
Stannous Chloride solutio n AsT:  Prepared from stannous  chloride solution by adding an equal 
volume of hydrochloric acid, boiling down to the original volume, and filtering through a fine -
grain filter paper.  
 
It complies with the following test:  
  To 10 ml add 6 ml of water and 10  ml of hydrochloric acid AsT, distil and collect 16 ml. To 
the distillate and 50 ml of water  and 2 drops of stannuous chloride solution AsT and apply the 
General Test; the stain produced is not deeper than a 1 -ml standard stain, showing that the 
proportion of arsenic present does not exceed 1 part per million.  Sulphuric acid AsT:  Sulphuric acid which complies with the following additional test:  
  Dilute 10 g with 50 ml of water, add 0.2 ml of stannous chloride solution AsT, and apply 
the General Test; no v isible stain is produced.  
 Zinc AsT:  Granulated Zinc which complies with following additional test: 
  Add 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid AsT  to 50 ml of water,  and apply the General 
Test, using 10 of the zinc and allowing the action to continue for one hour; no visible stain is produced (limit of arsenic). Repeat the test with the addition of 0.1 ml of dilute arsenic solution AsT;  a faint but distinct yellow stain is produced (test for sensitivity).  
  255 General Method of Testing  - By a variable method of  procedure suitable to the particular needs of 
each substance, a solution is prepared from the substance being examined which may or may not 
contain that substance, but contains the whole of the arsenic (if any) originally present in that substance. This s olution, referred to as the `test solution’, is used in the actual test. 
 General Test  - The glass tube is lightly packed with cotton wool, previously moistened with lead 
acetate solution and dried, so that the upper surface of the cotton wool is not less than 25 mm 
below the top of the tube. The upper end of the tube is then inserted into the narrow end of one of the pair of rubber bungs, either to a depth of about 10 mm when the tube has a rounded- off end, or 
so that the ground end of the tube is flush wi th the larger end of the bung. A piece of mercuric 
chloride paper is placed flat on the top of the bung and the other bung placed over it and secured by means of the rubber band or spring clip in such a manner that the borings of the two bungs (or the uppe r bung and the glass tube) meet to form a true tube 6.5 mm in diameter interrupted by a 
diaphrag m of mercuric chloride paper. 
  Instead of this method of attaching the mercuric chloride paper, any other method may be 
used provided (1) that the whole of the  evolved gas passes through the paper; (2) that the portion of 
the paper in contact with the gas is a circle 6.5 mm in diameter; and (3) that the paper is protected from sunlight during the test. The test solution prepared as specified, is placed in the wi de-mouthed 
bottle, 1 g of potassium iodide AsT and 10 g of zinc AsT  added, and the prepared glass tube is 
placed quickly in position. The action is allowed to proceed for 40 minutes. The yellow stain which is produced on the mercuric chloride paper if arsenic is present is compared by day light with the standard stains produced by operating in a similar manner with known quantities of dilute arsenic solution AsT . The comparison of the stains is made immediately at the completion of the test. The  
standard st ains used for comparison are freshly prepared; they fade on keeping.  
  By matching the depth of colour with standard stains , the proportion of arsenic in the 
substance may be determined. A stain equivalent to the 1- ml standard stain, produced by operating 
on 10 g of substance indicates that the proportion of arsenic is 1 part per million.  
 N
OTE: (1) The action may be accelerated by placing the apparatus on a warm surface, care being 
taken that the mercuric chloride paper remains dry throughout the test.  
 
(2) The most suitable temperature for carrying out the test is generally about 400 but 
because the rate of the evolution of the gas varies somewhat with different batches zinc AsT, the temperature may be adjusted to obtain a regular, but not violent, evolution o f 
gas. 
 (3) The tube must be washed with hydrochloric acid AsT , rinsed with water and dried 
between successive tests.  
 
Standard Stains  - Solutions are prepared by adding to 50 ml of water, 10 ml of stannated 
hydrochloric acid AsT  and quantities of dilute arsenic solutions AsT varying from 0.2 ml to 1 ml. 
The resulting solutions, when treated as described in the General Test, yield stains on the mercuric 
chloride paper referred to as the standard stains.  
 
Preparation of the Test Solution  
 
 In the various methods  of preparing the test solution given below, the quantities are so 
arranged unless otherwise stated, that when the stain produced from the solution to be examined is not deeper than the 1- ml standard stain , the proportion of arsenic present does not exceed the 
permitted limit.  
  256 Ammonium chloride  - Dissolve 2.5 g in 50 ml of water, and 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid 
AsT.  
 Boric acid  - Dissolve 10 g with 2 g of citric acid AsT   in 50 ml water, and add 12 ml of stannated 
hydrochloric acid AsT.  Ferrous  sulphate  - Dissolve 5 g in 10 ml of water and 15 ml of stannated hydrochloric  acid AsT 
and disitil 20 ml; to the distillate add a few drops of bromine solution AsT. Add 2 ml of stannated 
hydrochloric acid AsT, heat under a reflux condenser for one hour, c ool, and add 10 ml of water 
and 10 ml of hydrochloric acid AsT.  Glycerin  - Dissolve 5 g in 50 ml of water, and add 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid AsT. 
 Hydrochloric acid  - Mix 10 g with 40 ml of water and 1 ml of stannous chloride solution AsT.  
 
Mag nesium sulphate  - Dissolve 5 g in 50 ml of water and add 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric 
acid AsT. 
 
Phosphoric acid  - Dissolve 5 g in 50 ml of water  and add 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid 
AsT  
Potassium iodide  - Dissolve 5 g in 50 ml of water  and add 2 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid 
AsT. 
 
Sodium bicarbonate  - Dissolve 5 g in 50 ml of water and add 15 ml of brominated hydrochloric 
acid AsT, and remove the excess of bromine with a few drops of stannous chloride solution AsT.  
 Sodium hydroxide  - Disso lve 2.5 g in 50 ml of water, add 16 ml of brominated hydrochloric acid 
AsT, and remove the excess of bromine with a few drops of stannous chloride solution AsT.  
 
2.3.2. -  Limit Test for Chlorides  
 
 Dissolve the specified quantity of the substance in water  or prepare a solution as directed in 
the text and transfer to a Nessler cylinder. Add 10 ml of dilute nitric acid,  except when nitric acid is 
used in the preparation of the solution, dilute to 50 ml with water, and add 1 ml of silver nitrate solution. Stir immediately with a glass rod and allow to stand for 5 minutes. The opalescence 
produced is not greater than the standard opalescence, when viewed transversely.  
 
Standard Opalescence  
 
 Place 1.0 ml of a 0.05845 per  cent w/v solution of sodium chloride and  10 ml of dilute nitric 
acid in a Nessler cylinder . Dilute to 50 ml with water and add 1 ml of silver nitrate solution . Stir 
immediately with a glass rod and allow to stand for five minutes.  
 
2.3.3. -  Limit Test for Heavy M etals  
 
 The test for heavy metals  is designed to determine the content of metallic impurities that are 
coloured by sulphide ion, under specified conditions. The limit for heavy metals is indicated in the 
individual monographs in terms of the parts of lead per million parts of the substanc e (by weight), 
as determined by visual comparison of the colour produced by the substance with that of a control prepared from a standard lead solution.   Determine the amount of heavy metals by one of the following methods and as directed in 
the individua l monographs. Method A is used for substances that yield clear colourless solutions  257 under the specified test conditions. Method B is used for substances that do not yield clear, 
colourless solutions under the test conditions specified for method A, or for substances which, by virtue of their complex nature, interfere with the precipitation of metals by sulphide ion. Method C is used for substances that yield clear, colourless solutions with sodium hydroxide solution.  
Special Reagents  
 
Acetic acid Sp. : Acetic acid  which complies with the following additional test : Make 25 ml 
alkaline with dilute ammonia solution Sp., add 1 ml of potassium cyanide solution Sp., dilute to 50 
ml with water and add two drops of sodium sulphide solution; no darkening is produced.  
 Dilute acetic acid Sp. : Dilute acetic acid, which complies with the following additional test – 
Evaporate 20 ml in a porcelain dish, nearly to dryness on a water -bath. Add to the residue 2 ml of 
the acid and dilute with water to 25 ml, add 10 ml of hydr ogen sulphide solution. Any dark colour 
produced is not more than that of a control solution consisting of 2 ml of the acid and 4.0 ml of standard lead solution diluted to 25 ml with water.  
 Ammonia solution Sp.:  Strong ammonia solution which complies with the following additional 
test: Evaporate 10 ml to dryness on a water -bath; to the residue add 1 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid 
Sp. and evaporate to dryness. Dissolve the residue in 2 ml of dilute acetic acid Sp. Add sufficient water to produce 25 ml.  
  Add 10 ml of hydrogen sulphide solution. Any darkening produced is not greater than in a 
blank solution containing 2 ml of dilute acetic acid Sp. 1.0 ml of standard lead solution and sufficient water to produce 25 ml.  Dilute ammonia solution Sp. : Dilute amm onia solution which complies with the following 
additional test: To 20 ml add 1 ml of potassium cyanide solution Sp., dilute to 50 ml with water, 
and add two drops of sodium sulphide solution;  no darkening is produced.  
 Hydrochloric acid: Hydrochloric acid which complies with the following additional test: 
Evaporate off the acid in a beaker to dryness on a water -bath. Dissolve the residue in 2 ml of dilute 
acid Sp., dilute to 17 ml with water and add 10 ml of hydrogen sulphide solution;  any darkening 
produc ed is not greater than in a blank solution containing 2.0 ml of standard lead solution, 2 ml of 
dilute acetic acid Sp. and dilute to 40 ml with water.  
 Dilute hydrochloric acid Sp. : Dilute hydrochloric acid, which complies with the following 
additional tes t: Treat 10 ml of the acid in the manner described under Hydrochloric acid Sp. 
 Lead nitrate stock solution : Dissolve 0.1598 g of lead nitrate  in 100 ml of water  to which has 
been added 1 ml of nitric acid, then dilute with water  to 1000 ml. This solution must be prepared 
and stored in polyethylene or glass containers free from soluble lead salts.  
 Standard lead solution:  On the day of use, dilute 10.0 ml of lead nitrate stock solution with water 
to 100.0 ml. Each ml of standard lead solution contains the e quivalent of 10 µg of lead. A control 
comparison solution prepared with 2.0 ml of standard lead solution contains, when compared to a solution representing 1.0 g of the substance being tested, the equivalent of 20 parts per million of lead.  
 Nitric acid Sp .: Nitric acid  which complies with the following additional test: Dilute 10 ml with 10 
ml of water, make alkaline with  ammonia solution Sp., add 1 ml of potassium cyanide solution Sp., 
dilute to 50 ml with water, and add two drops of sodium sulphide soluti on; no darkening is 
produced.   258  
Potassium cyanide solution Sp.:  See Appendix 2.3.5.  
 
Sulphuric acid Sp. : Sulphuric acid which complies with following additional test: Add 5 g to 20 
ml of water  make alkaline with ammonia solution Sp., add 1 ml of potassium cyanide solution Sp., 
dilute to 50 ml with water  and add two drops of sodium sulphide solution;  no darkening is 
produced.  
 
Method A  
 
Standard solution -  Into a 50 ml Nessler cylinder, pipette 2 ml of standard lead solution and dilute 
with water  to 25 ml.  Adjust with dilute acetic acid Sp. or dilute ammonia solution Sp to a pH 
between 3.0 and 4.0, dilute with water  to about 35 ml, and mix.  
 Test solution  - In to a 50 ml Nessler cylinder, place 25 ml of the solution prepared for the test as 
directed in the  individual monograph, or using the stated volume of acid when specified in the 
individual monograph, dissolve and dilute with water  to 25 ml the specified quantity of the 
substance being tested. Adjust with dilute acetic acid Sp. or dilute ammonia solution Sp.  to a pH 
between 3.0 and 4.0, dilute with water  to about 35 ml and mix.  
 Procedure - To each of the cylinders containing the standard solution and test  solution,  
respectively , add 10 ml of freshly prepared hydrogen sulphide solution, mix, dilute with  water  to 50 
ml, allow to stand for five minutes, and view downwards over a white surface; the colour produced in the test solution  is not darker than that produced in the standard solution. 
 
Method B  
 
Standard solution -  Proceed as directed under Method A . 
 Test solution  - Weigh in a suitable crucible the quantity of the substance specified in individual 
monograph, add sufficient sulphuric acid Sp. to wet the sample, and ignite carefully at a low temperature until thoroughly charred. Add to the charred mas s 2 ml of nitric acid Sp.  and five drops 
of sulphuric acid Sp. and heat cautiously until white fumes are no longer evolved. Ignite, preferably 
in a muffle furnace, at 500
0 to 6000 until the carbon is completely burnt off. Cool, add 4 ml of 
hydrochloric aci d Sp., cover, digest on a water bath for 15 minutes, uncover and slowly evaporate 
to dryness on a water -bath. Moisten the residue with one drop of hydrochloric acid Sp., add 10 ml 
of hot water and digest for two minutes. Add ammonia solution sp ., dropwise, until the solution is 
just alkaline to litmus paper, dilute with water to 25 ml and adjust with dilute acetic acid Sp. to a 
pH between 3.0 and 4.0. Filter if necessary, rinse the crucible and the filter with 10 ml of water, combine the filtrate and washin gs in a 50 ml Nessler cylinder, dilute with water, to about 35 ml, 
and mix. Procedure: Proceed as directed under Method A.  
Method C  
 
Standard solution - Into a 50 ml Nessler cylinder, pipette 2 ml of standard lead solution,  add 5 ml 
of dilute sodium hydroxide solution., dilute with water  to 50 ml and mix.  
 Test solution  - Into a 50 ml Nessler cylinder,  place 25 ml of the solution prepared for the test as 
directed in the individual monograph; or, if not specified otherwise in the individual monograph, disso lve the specified quantity in a mixture of 20 ml of water and 5 ml of dilute sodium hydroxide 
solution. Dilute 50 ml with water and mix.  
  259 Procedure - To each of the cylinders containing the standard solution and the test solution,  
respectively add 5 drops of sodium sulphide solution, mix, allow to stand for five minutes and view 
downwards over a white surface; the colour produced in the test solution  is not darker than that 
produced in the standard solution.  
 
 
2.3.4. -  Limit Test for Iron  
 
Standard Iron sol ution  - Weigh accurately 0.1726 g of ferric ammonium sulphate and dissolve in 
10 ml of 0.1 N sulphuric acid and sufficient water  to produce 1000.0 ml. Each ml of this solution 
contains 0.02 mg of Fe.  
 
Method  
 
 Dissolve the specified quantity of the substan ce being examined in 40 ml of water, or use 10 
ml of the solution prescribed in the monograph, and transfer to a Nessler cylinder.  Add 2 ml of a 
20 per cent w/v solution of iron- free citric acid and 0.1 ml of thioglycollic acid, mix, make alkaline 
with iron-free ammonia solution, dilute to 50 ml with water  and allow to stand for five minutes. 
Any colour produced is not more intense than the standard colour.  
 Standard colour  - Dilute 2.0 ml of standard iron solution with 40 ml of water in a Nessler 
cylinder . Add 2 ml of a 20 per cent w/v solution of iron- free citric acid and 0.1 ml of thioglycollic 
acid, mix, make alkaline with iron- free ammonia solution, dilute to 50 ml with water and allow to 
stand for five minutes.  
 
2.3.5. -  Limit Test for Lead  
 
 The fol lowing method is based on the extraction of lead by solutions of dithizone . All 
reagents used for the test should have as low a content of lead as practicable. All reagent solutions 
should be stored in containers of borosilicate glass. Glassware should be rinsed thoroughly with warm dilute nitric acid, followed by water.  
 
Special Reagents  
 
(1) Ammonia -cyanide solution Sp. :  Dissolve 2 g of potassium cyanide in 15 ml of strong 
ammonia solution and dilute with water  to 100 ml.  
 
(2) Ammonium citrate solution Sp. :  Dissolve 40 g of citric acid in 90 ml water. Add two drops 
of phenol  red solution then add slowly strong ammonia solution until the solution acquires a 
reddish colour. Remove any lead present by extracting the solution with 20 ml quantities of 
dithizone  extraction solution until the dithizone  solution retains its orange -green colour.  
 
(3) Dilute standard lead solution: Dilute 10.0 ml of standard lead solution with sufficient 1 per 
cent v/v solution of nitric acid to produce 100 ml. Each ml of this solution contains 1 µg of lead per ml.  
 (4) Dithizone extraction solution : Dissolve 30 mg of diphenylthiocarbazone in 1000 ml of 
chloroform and add 5 ml of alcohol. Store the solution in a refrigerator. Before use, shake a 
suitable volume of the solution with about half its volume of 1 per cent v/v solution of nitric acid and discard the acid.  
 (5) Hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution Sp.: Dissolve 20 g of hydroxylamine hydrochloride 
in sufficient water to produce about 65 ml. Transfer to separator, add five drops of thymol blue  260 solution, add strong ammonia solution until the solution becomes yellow. Add 10 ml of a 4 per 
cent w/v solution of sodium diethyldithiocarbamate and allow to stand for five minutes. Extract 
with successive quantities, each of 10 ml, of chloroform until a 5 ml portion of the extract does 
not assume a yellow colour when shaken with dilute copper sulphate solution. Add dilute hydrochloric acid until the solution is pink and then dilute with sufficient water to produce 100 
ml. 
 (6) Potassium cyanide solution Sp.:  Dissolve 50 g of potassium cyanide  in sufficient water  to 
produce 100 ml. Remove the lead from this solution by extraction with successive quantities, each of 20 ml of dithizone extraction solution until the dithizone solution retains its orange -
green colour . Extract any dithizone remaining in the cyanide solution by shaking with 
chloroform. Dilute this cyanide solution with sufficient water  to produce a solution containing 
10 g of potassium cyanide in each 100 ml.  
 (7) Standard dithizone solution: Dissolve 10 ml  of diphenylthiocarbazone in 1000 ml of 
chloroform. Store the solution in a glass -stoppered, lead- free bottle, protected from light and in 
a refrigerator.  
 (8) Citrate -cyanide wash solution : To 50 ml of water add 50 ml of ammonium citrate solution Sp.  
and 4 ml  of potassium cyanide solution Sp., mix, and adjust the pH, if necessary, with strong 
ammonia solution to 9.0.  
 (9)  Buffer solution p H 2.5: To 25.0 ml of 0.2 M potassium hydrogen phthalate add 37.0 ml of 0.1 
N hydrochloric acid, and dilute with sufficient wat er to produce 100.0 ml.  
 (10) Dithizone -carbon tetrachloride solution : Dissolve 10 mg of diphenylthiocarbazone in 1000 
ml of carbon tetrachloride. Prepare this solution fresh for each determination. 
 
(11)  pH 2.5 wash solution : To 500 ml of a 1 per cent v/v nit ric acid add strong ammonia solution     
until the pH of the mixture is 2.5, then add 10 ml of buffer solution pH 2.5 and mix.  
 (12) Ammonia -cyanide wash solution : To 35 ml of pH 2.5 wash solution add 4 ml of ammonia -                  
cyanide solution Sp., and mix.  
 
Method  
 
 Transfer the volume of the prepared sample directed in the monograph to a separator and 
unless otherwise directed in monograph, add 6 ml of ammonium citrate solution Sp., and 2 ml hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution Sp., (For the dete rmination of lead in iron salts use 10 ml of 
ammonium citrate solution Sp.). Add two drops of phenol red solution and make the solution just 
alkaline (red in colour) by the addition of strong ammonnia solution. Cool the solution if necessary, and add 2 ml of potassium cyanide solution Sp . Immediately extract the solution with several 
quantities each of 5 ml, of dithizone extraction solution, draining off each extract into another separating funnel, until the dithizone extraction solution retains its green c olour. Shake the combine 
dithizone solutions for 30 seconds with 30 ml of a 1 per cent w/v solution of nitric acid and discard the chloroform layer. Add to the solution exactly 5 ml of standard dithizone solution and 4 ml of 
ammonia- cyanide solution Sp . and shake for 30 seconds; the colour of the chloroform layer is of no 
deeper shade of violet than that of a control made with a volume of dilute standard lead solution equivalent to the amount of lead permitted in the sample under examination. 
 
  
  261  
2.3.6. -  Limit Test for Sulphates  
 Reagents  
 
Barium sulphate reagent : Mix 15 ml of 0.5 M barium chloride, 55 ml of water, and 20 ml of 
sulphate free alcohol, add 5 ml of a 0.0181 per cent w/v solution of potassium sulphate, dilute to 
100 ml with water, and mix. B arium sulphate reagent must be freshly prepared.  
 0.5 M Barium chloride : Barium chloride dissolved in water  to contain in 1000 ml 122.1 g of 
BaCl
2,  2H 2O. 
 
Method  
 
 Dissolve the specified quantity of the substance in water,  or prepare a solution as direct ed in 
the text, transfer to a Nessler cylinder,  and add 2 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid, except where 
hydrochloric acid is used in the preparation of the solution. Dilute to 45 ml with water , add 5 ml of 
barium sulphate reagent. Stir immediately with a glass rod, and allow to stand for five minutes. The 
turbidity produced is not greater than the standard turbidity , when viewed t ransversely. Standard 
turbidity: Place 1.0 ml of 0.1089 per cent w/v solution of potassium sulphate and 2 ml of dilute hydrochlori c acid  in a Nessler cylinder ,dilute to 45 ml with water , add 5 ml of barium sulphate 
reagent, stir immediately with a glass rod and allow to stand for five minutes.  
 
2.3.7. -  Heavy Metals by Atomic A bsorption S pectrophotometry  
 
Atomic absorption spectrophotometry is used in the determination of heavy metal elements 
and some nonmetal elements in the atomic state.  
 
The light of characteristic wave length emitted from a cathodic discharge lamp is absorbed 
when it passes through the atomic vapor generated from  sample containing the element being 
examined atomized to the ground state. The assay of the element being examined is tested by determining the decreased degree of light intensity of radiation. Atomic absorption obeys the general rule for absorption spect rophotometry. The assay is carried out by comparing the 
abosorbance of the test preparation with that of the reference preparation.  
 
Apparatus  
 
An atomic absorption spectrophotometer consists of a light source, an atomic generator, a 
monochromator and a de tector system. Some are equipped with a background compensation system 
and automatic sampling system, etc.  
1. Light Source : A hollow -cathode discharge lamp is usually used. The cathode is made of the 
element being examined.  
 2. Atomic Generator: There are four main types : flame atomizer, graphite furnace atomizer, 
hydride -generated atomizer, cold vapor atomizer.  
 (1) Flame atomizer : It mainly consists of a nebulizer and a burner. Its function is to nebulize the 
test solution into aerosol, which is mixed wi th combustion gas. And the mixture is introduced into 
the flame generated by the burner. So that the substance being examined is to be dried, evaporated to form the ground state atoms of the element being examined. The burning flame is generated by differe nt mixtures of gases, acetylene -air is mostly used. By modifying the proportion of 
combustion gas, the temperature of the flame can be controlled and a better stability and a better 
sensitivity can be obtained.  262  
(2) Furnace atomizer: It consists of electric furnace and a power supply. Its function is to dry and 
incinerate the substance being examined. During the stage of high temperature atomization, the ground state atoms of the element being examined are to be formed. Graphite is commonly used as the heat er. Protection gas is introduced into the furnace to avoid oxidation and used to transfer the 
sample vapor.  
 (3) Hydride -generated atomizer:  It consists of hydride generator and atomic absorption cell. It is 
used for the determination of the elements such as arsenic, selenium and antimony etc. Its function is to reduce the element to be examined in acidic medium to the low -boiling and easily pyrolyzed 
hydride. The hydride is then swept by a stream of carrier gas into the atomic absorption cell which consist s of quartz tube and heater etc., in which the hydride is pyrolyzed by heating to form the 
ground -state atom.  
 (4) Cold vapor atomizer : It consists of a mercury vapor atomizer and an absorption cell. It is 
suitable for the determination of mercury. Its fun ction is to reduce the mercuric ion into mercury 
vapor which is swept into the quartz absorption cell by carrier gas.  
 
3. Monochromator : Its function is to separate the specified wavelength radiation from the 
electromagnetic radiations er radiated from the light source. The optical path of the apparatus should 
assure the good spectra resolution and has the ability to work well at the condition of narrow 
spectral band (0.2 nm). The commonly used wavelength region is 190.0 -  900.0 nm. 
 4. Detector system : It consists of a detector, a signal processor and a recording system. It should 
have relatively higher sensitivity and better stability and can follow the rapid change of the signal absorption. 
 
5. Background compensation system : System employed for the correction of atmospheric effects 
on the measuring system. Four principles can be utili zed for background compensation: continuous 
spectrum sources (a deuterium lamp is often used in the UV region), the Zeeman effect, the self 
inversion phenomenon and the non re sonance spectrum. In the analysis using atomic absorption 
spectrophotometry, the interference to the determination caused by background and other reasons should be noticed. Changes of some experimental conditions, such as the wavelength, the slit width, the atomizing condition, etc., may affect the sensitivity, the stability and the interference. If it is flame, the suitable wavelength, slit width and flame temperature, the addition of complexing agents and releasing agents and the use of Standard addition method may eliminate interference. If it is furnace, system, the selection of suitable background compensation system and the addition of suitable matrix modifying agents, etc may remove the interference. Background compensation method shall be selected as  specified in the individual monograph.  
 
Procedure  
 
Method  (direct calibration method)  
Prepare not less than 3 reference solutions of the element being examined of different 
concentrations, covering the range recommended by the instrument manufacturer and add 
separately the corresponding reagents as that for the test solution and prepare the blank reference solution with the corresponding reagents. Measure the absorbances of the blank reference solution and each reference solution of different concentratio ns separately, record the readings and prepare a 
calibration curve with the average value of 3 readings of each concentration on the ordinate and the corresponding concentration on the abscissa.  
 
Prepare a test solution of the substance being examined as s pecified in the monograph, 
adjust the concentration to fall within the concentration range of the reference solution. Measure the  263 absorbance 3 times, record the readings and calculate the average value. Interpolate the mean value 
of the readings on the cal ibration curve to determine the concentration of the element.  
 
When used in the test for impurities, prepare two test preparations of the same concentration 
as specified in the monograph. To one of the test preparation add an amount of the reference substa nce equivalent to the limit of the element specified in the monograph. Proceed as directed 
above and measure this solution to give an appropriate reading a; then measure the test preparation without the addition of the reference substance under the same condition and record the reading b; b is not greater than (a -b).  
 
2.3.8. -  Determination of Lead, Cadmium, Arsenic, Mercury and Copper  
 (1) Determination of L ead(Pb) (Graphite Oven Method) : 
 Determination conditions : Reference condition: dry temperature: 100 -120
0, maintain 20 seconds; 
ash temperature: 400 -7500, maintain 20- 25 seconds; atomic temperature: 1700- 21000 , maintain 4 -5 
seconds; measurement wavelength: 283.3 nm; background calibration: deuterium lamp (D lamp) or Zeeman effect.  
 
Preparation of lead standard stock solution : Measure accurately a quantity of lead single-
element standard solution to prepare standard stock solution with 2  per cent nitric acid solution, 
which containing 1 µg per ml, stored at 0- 5
0. 
 Preparation of calibration curve: Measur e accurately a quantity of lead standard stock solutions 
respectively, diluted with 2 per cent nitric acid solution to the concentration of 0, 5, 20, 40, 60, 80 
ng per ml , respectively. Measure respectively accurately 1 ml the above solution, add respectiv ely 1 
ml of 1  per cent ammonium dihydrogen phosphate and 0.2 per cent magnesium nitrate  mix well, 
pipette accurately 20 µl to inject into the atomic generator of graphite oven and determine their 
absorbance, then draw the calibration curve with absorbance as vertical axis and concentration as horizontal ordinate. 
 
Preparation of test solution  
  
Method  
 
 Weigh accurately 0.5 g of the coarse powder of the substance being examined, transfer into 
a casparian flask, add 5 -10 ml of the mixture of nitric acid  and perchloric acid  (4 : 1), add a small 
hopper on the flask- top, macerate overnight, heat to slake on the electric hot plate, keep somewhat -
boiling, if brownish- black, add again a quantity of the above mixture, continuously heat till the 
solution becomes cl ean and transparent, then raise temperature, heat continuously to thick smoke, 
till white smoke disperse, the slaked solution becomes colourless and transparent or a little yellow, 
cool, transfer it into a 50 ml volumetric flask, wash the container with 2 pe r cent nitric acid solution  
add the washing solution into the same volumetric flask and dilute with the same solvent to the volume, shake well. Prepare synchronously the reagent blank solution according to the above procedure.  
 Determination : Measure accu rately 1 ml of the test solution and its corresponding reagent blank 
solution respectively, add 1 ml of solution containing 1per cent ammonium dihydrogen phosphate  
and 0.2 per cent magnesium nitrate , shake well, pipette accurately 10 -20 µl to determine the ir 
absorbance according to the above method of “Preparation of calibration curve”. Calculate the content of lead (Pd) in the test solution from the calibration curve.  
 
  264 (2) Determination of C admium (Cd) ( Graphite O ven M ethod)  
 
Determination conditions : Reference condition: dry temperature: 100- 1200 , maintain 20 seconds; 
ash temperature: 300 -5000 , maintain 20 -25 seconds; atomic temperature: 1500- 19000, maintain 4 -5 
seconds; measurement wavelength: 228.8 nm; background calibration: deuterium lamp (D lamp) o r 
Zeeman effect.  
  Preparation of Cd standard stock solution:  Measure accurately a quantity of Cd single- element 
standard solution to prepare standard stock solution Cd with 2 per cent nitric acid, which containing 
0.4 µg per ml Cd, stored at 0- 5
0. 
 Prepar ation of calibration curve:  Measure accurately a quantity of cadmium standard stock 
solutions, diluted to the concentration of 1.6, 3.2, 4.8, 6.4 and 8.0 ng per ml with 2 per cent nitric 
acid, respectively. Pipette accurately 10 µl the above solutions respectively, inject them into the 
graphite oven, determine their absorbance, and then draw the calibration curve with absorbance as vertical axis and concentration as horizontal ordinate.  
 Preparation of test solution:   Reference to “Preparation of test solut ion” of Pb in the above.  
 
Determination: Pipette accurately 10 -20 µl of the test solution and its corresponding reagent blank 
solution respectively, determine their absorbance according to the above method of “Preparation of 
calibration curve. If interfere nce occurs, weigh accurately respectively 1 ml of the standard 
solution, blank solution and test solution, add 1 ml of a solution containing 1per cent ammonium dihydrogen phosphate  and 0.2 per cent magnesium nitrate , shake well, determine their  absorbance  
according to the method above, calculate the content of Cd in the test solution from the calibration curve.  
 (3) Determination of A rsenic (As) ( Hydride M ethod)  
 
Determination conditions : Apparatus: suitable hydride generator device, reducing agent: a 
solution containing 1 per cent sodium borohydride  and 0.3 per cent sodium hydroxide ; carrier 
liquid: 1  per cent hydrochloric acid ; carrier gas: nitrogen; measurement wavelength: 193.7 nm; 
background calibration: deuterium lamp (D lamp) or Zeeman effect.  
 Prepa ration of As standard stock solution : Measure accurately a quantity of As single -element 
standard solution to prepare standard stock solution with 2 per cent nitric acid  solution, which 
containi s 1.0 µg per ml As, stored at 0- 5
0. 
 Preparation of calibration curve:  Measure accurately proper quantity of arsenic standard stock 
solutions, diluted with 2  per cent nitric acid  to the concentration of 2, 4, 8, 12 and 16 ng per ml 
respectively. Accurately transfer 10 ml of each into 25 ml volumetric flask respectively, add 1 ml 
of 25 per cent potassium iodide solution (prepared prior to use), shake well, add 1 ml of ascorbic 
acid solution (prepared prior to use), shake well, dilute with hydrochloric acid solution (20- 100) to 
the volume, shake well, close the stopper and immerse the flask in a water bath at 80
0 for 3 
minutes. Cool, transfer proper quantities of each solution respectively into the hydride generator device, determine the absorbance, then plot the calibration curve with peak area (absorbance) as vertical axis and concentration as horizontal ordinate.  
 Preparation of test solution:   Reference to A or B method of “Preparation of test solution” of Pb 
in the above.  
 
Determination: Pipette accurately 10 ml of the test solution and its corresponding reagent blank 
solution respectively, proceed as described under “Preparation of calibration curve” beginning at  265 the words “add 1 ml of 25 per cent potassium iodide solution”. Calculate the content of As in the 
test solution from the calibration curve.  
 
(4) Determinati on of Mercury (Hg) ( Cold A bsorption M ethod)  
 Determination conditions:  Apparatus: suitable hydride generator device; reducing agent: a 
solution containing 0.5 per cent sodium borohydride  and 0.1 per cent sodium hydroxide ; carrier 
liquid: 1 per cent hydroch loric acid ; carrier gas: nitrogen; measurement wavelength: 253.6 nm; 
background calibration: deuterium lamp (D lamp) or Zeeman effect.  
 
Preparation of mercury standard stock solution:   Measure accurately a proper quantity of 
mercury single- element standard  solution to prepare standard stock solution with 2 per cent nitric 
acid solution, which containing 1.0 µg per ml Hg, stored at 0- 5
0. 
 
Preparation of calibration curve:  Measure accurately 0, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 and 0.9 ml of mercury 
standard stock solution, transfer into a 50 ml volumetric flask respectively, add 40 ml 4 per cent 
sulphuric acid  solution and 0.5 ml of 5 per cent potassium permanganate solution, shake well, drop 
5 per cent hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution until the violet red just disappea rs, dilute with 4  
per cent sulfuric acid solution to the volume, shake well. A quantity of each solution is injected to 
the hydride generator device, determine the absorbance, then plot the calibration curve with peak area (absorbance) as vertical axis and  concentration as horizontal ordinate. 
 
Preparation of test solution   
 Method  
 Transfer 1 g of the coarse powder of the substance being examined, accurately weighed, 
into a casparian flask, add 5 -10 ml of the mixture solution of nitric acid  and perchloric acid (4 : 1), 
mix well, fix a small hopper on the flask -top, immerse overnight, heat to slake on the electric hot 
plate at 120 -140
0 for 4 -8 hours until slaking completely, cool, add a quantity of 4 per cent sulfuric 
acid solution and 0.5 ml of 5 per cent potassium permanganate solution, shake well, drop 5 per 
cent hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution until the violet red colour just disappears, dilute with 4  
per cent s ulphuric acid  solutions  to 25 ml, shake well, centrifugate if necessary, the supernatant i s 
used as the test solution. Prepare synchronally the reagent blank solute based on the same 
procedure.  
  Determination: Pipette accurately a quantity of the test solution and its corresponding reagent 
blank solution, respectively, proceed as described under “Preparation of calibration curve” beginning at the words “add 1 ml of 25 per cent potassium iodide solution”. Calculate the content 
of mercury (Hg) in the test solution from the calibration curve.  
 (5) Determination of Copper (Cu) ( Flame Method)  
 
Deter mination conditions : Measurement wavelength: 324.7 nm; flame: air - acetylene flame; 
background calibration: deuterium lamp or Zeeman effect.  
  Preparation of copper standard stock solution:   Measure accurately a proper quantity of 
copper single -element standard solution, to prepare the standard stock solution with 2 per cent 
nitric acid solution , which containing 10 µg per ml Cu, stored at 0- 5
0. 
 Preparation of calibration curve:  Measure accurately a quantity of copper standard stock 
solutions, dilute with 2 per cent nitric acid to the concentrations of 0.05, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8 µg per 
ml, respectively. Inject each standard solution into the flame and determine the absorbance,  266 respective, then plot the calibration curve with absorbance as vertical axis and concentration as 
horizontal ordinate. 
 Preparation of test solution: Reference to “Preparation of test solution” of Pb in the above.  
 Determination: Pipette accurately quantities of the test solution and its corresponding reagent 
blank solution respective ly, proceed as described under “Preparation of calibration curve”. 
Calculate the content of Cu in the test solution from the calibration curve.  
 2.3.9 Determination of Calcium O xide 
  Apparatus  
 
(1) Calibrated Brix spindle  
(2) Brix Cylinder  
(3) Conical fla sks - 250 ml capacity  
(4) Beakers – 100 and 200 ml capacity  
(5) Funnels  
(6) Pipettes - calibrated at 10 ml  
 
Reagents  
 
(1) EDTA solution – Weigh accurately 6.6473 gm EDTA into a  beaker , dissolve in distilled water   
and make upto 1000 ml to obtain exactly M  / 56 solution  
(2) Ammonia Liquor  
(3) Lead Subacetate  
(4) Potassium Ferrocyanide powder  
(5) Potassium iodide  
(6) Eriochrome Black – T – weigh 0.1 eriochrome black T in a 100 ml volumetric flask and 
dissolve the same in rectified spirit or absolute alcohol. Make upto volume and use as indicator  
 
Procedure  
 
Make a 15 0 Brix solution of the sample. Transfer about 150 ml of the solution to a conical 
flask. Clarify the solution with Lead subacetate. Transfer about 60 ml of the clarified solution to a dry conical  flask or flask previously rinsed with the clarified solution. Add Potassium Ferrocyanide 
powder little by little till no further precipitate forms. Shake thoroughly and filter. Test the filterate with Pot. Iodide.. Collect the lead free filterate in a con ical flask Pipette out 10 ml of lead free   
filterate in a clean conical flask previously rinsed with distilled water and dried. Add 5 – 6 drops of 
liquor ammonia and 4- 5 drops of indicator when a pink colour appears. Titrate against EDTA 
solution shaking t he flask after each addition of EDTA solution. The end point is indicated by a 
sharp change of colour from red to blue. Note down the volume of the titrant  
 Calculation  
 
Calcium oxide mg / 100 gm = V X 100 mg per litre of diluted solution 
 (Ref : - I.S.I. H andbook of Food Analysis (Part II) – 1984 page 9)  
 
2.4. -  MICROBIAL LIMIT TESTS  
The following tests are designed for the estimation of the number of viable aerobic micro-
organisms present and for detecting the presence of designated microbial species in pharmaceutical  267 substances. The term ‘growth’ is used to designate the presence and presumed proliferation of 
viable micro -organisms. 
 Preliminary Testing   
The methods given herein are invalid unless it is demonstrated that the test specimens to 
which they a re applied do not, of themselves, inhibit the multiplication under the test conditions of 
micro -organisms that can be present. Therefore, prior to doing the tests, inoculate diluted 
specimens of the substance being examined with separate viable cultures of  Escherichia coli , 
Salmonella species, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus . This is done by adding 1 
ml of not less than 10
-3 dilutions of a 24 h broth culture of the micro- organisms to the first dilution 
(in buffer solution pH 7.2, fluid soya bean -casein digest medium or fluid lactose medium) of the test 
material and following the test procedure. If the organisms fail to grow in the relevant medium the procedure should be modified by (a) increasing the volume of diluent with the quantity of tes t 
material remaining the same, or (b) incorporating a sufficient quantity of a suitable inactivating agent in the diluents, or (c) combining the aforementioned modifications so as to permit growth of the organisms in the media. If inhibitory substances are  present in the sample, 0.5 per cent of soya 
lecithin and 4 per cent of polysorbate 20 may be added to the culture medium. Alternatively, repeat 
the test as described in the previous paragraph, using fluid casein digest -soya lecithin -polysorbate 
20 medium to demonstrate neutralization of preservatives or other antimicrobial agents in the test material. Where inhibitory substances are contained in the product and the latter is soluble, the Membrane filtration method described under Total Aerobic Microbial Count may be used.  
 
If in spite of incorporation of suitable inactivating agents and a substantial increase in the 
volume of diluent it is still not possible to recover the viable cultures described above and where the article is not suitable for applying th e membrane filtration method it can be assumed that the 
failure to isolate the inoculated organism may be due to the bactericidal activity of the product. This may indicate that the article is not likely to be contaminated with the given species of micro -
organisms. However, monitoring should be continued to establish the spectrum of inhibition and bactericidal activity of the article.  
  
Media   
Culture media may be prepared as given below or dehydrated culture media may be used 
provided that, when reconstit uted as directed by the manufacturer, they have similar ingredients and 
/ or yield media comparable to those obtained from the formulae given below. 
 
Where agar is specified in a formula, use agar that has a moisture content of not more than 
15 per cent. W here water is called for in a formula, use purified water. Unless otherwise indicated, 
the media should be sterilized by heating in an autoclave at 115
0 for 30 minutes. 
 
In preparing media by the formulas given below, dissolve the soluble solids in the wat er, 
using heat if necessary, to effect complete solution and add solutions of hydrochloric acid or 
sodium hydroxide in quantities sufficient to yield the required pH in the medium when it is ready for use. Determine the p H at 25
0 ± 20. 
 
Baird -Parker Agar Medium  
  Pancreatic digest of casein    10.0 g 
 Beef extract        5.0 g 
 Yeast extract        1.0 g 
 Lithium chloride       5.0 g 
 Agar       20.0 g  268  Glycine      12.0 g 
 Sodium pyruvate     10.0 g 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Heat with frequent agitation and boil for  1 minute. Sterilise, cool to between 450 and 500, 
and add 10 ml of a one per cent w/v solution of sterile potassium tellurite  and 50 ml of egg -yolk 
emulsion. Mix intimately but gently and pour into plates. (Prepare the egg- yolk emulsion by 
disinfecting th e surface of whole shell eggs, aseptically cracking the eggs, and separating out intact 
yolks into a sterile graduated cylinder. Add sterile saline solution, get a 3 to 7 ratio of egg- yolk to 
saline. Add to a sterile blender cup, and mix at high speed for 5 seconds). Adjust the pH after 
sterilization to 6.8 ± 0.2.  
 
Bismuth Sulphite Agar Medium  
 Solution (1)  
  Beef extract       6 g 
 Peptone       10 g 
 Agar        24 g 
 Ferric citrate       0.4 g 
 Brilliant green       10 mg 
 Water to       1000 ml 
 Dissolve with the aid of heat and sterilise by maintaining at 115
0 for 30 minutes. 
 Solution (2)  
  Ammonium bismuth citrate     3 g 
            Sodium sulphite      10 g 
 Anhydrous disodium hydrogen Phosphate   5 g 
 Dextrose monohydrate     5 g 
 Water to       100 ml 
 
Mix, heat to boiling, cool to room temperature, add 1 volume of solution (2) to 10 volumes 
of solution (1) previously melted and cooled to a temperature of 55
 0 and pour. 
 Bismuth Sulphite Agar Medium should be stored at 2
0 to 80 for 5 days before use.  
 Brilliant Green Agar Medium  
 
 Peptone       10.0 g 
 Yeast extract       3.0 g 
 Lactose       10.0 g 
 Sucrose       10.0 g 
 Sodium chloride      5.0 g 
 Phenol red       80.0 g 
 Brilliant green       12.5 mg 
 Agar        12.0 g 
 Water to       1000 ml 
 
 
  269 Mix, allow to sta nd for 15 minutes, sterilise by maintaining at 1150 for 30 minutes and mix 
before pouring.  
 
Buffered Sodium Chloride -Peptone Solution pH 7.0 
 
 Potassium dihydrogen phosphate    3.56 g 
 Disodium hydrogen phosphate    7.23 g 
 Sodium chloride      4.30 g 
 Peptone (meat or casein)     1.0 g 
 Water to       1000 ml 
 
0.1 to 1.0 per cent w/v polysorbate 20 or polysorbate 80 may be added. Sterilise by heating 
in an autoclave at 1210 for 15 minutes. 
 
Casein Soyabean Digest Agar Medium  
 
 Pancreatic digest of casein     15.0 g 
 Papaic digest of soyabean meal    5.0 g 
 Sodium chloride      5.0 g 
 Agar        15.0 g 
 Water to       1000 ml 
 
Adjust the pH after sterilization to 7.3±0.2.  
 Cetrimide Agar Medium  
 
 Pancreatic digest of gelatin     20.0 g 
 Magnesium chloride      1.4 g 
 Potassium sulphate      10.0 g 
 Cetrimide       0.3 g 
 Agar        13.6 g 
 Glycerin       10.0 g 
 Water to       1000 ml 
 
Heat to boiling for 1 minute with shaking. Adjust the pH so that after sterilization it is 7.0 to 
7.4. Sterilise at 121
0 for 15 minutes. 
 
Desoxycholate -Citrate Agar Medium  
 
 Beef extract       5.0 g 
 Peptone       5.0 g 
 Lactose       10.0 g 
 Trisodium citrate      8.5 g 
 Sodium thiosulphate      5.4 g 
 Ferric citrate       1.0 g 
 Sodium desoxycholate     5.0 g 
 Neutral red       0.02 g 
 Agar        12.0 g 
 Water to       1000 ml 
 
Mix and allow to stand for 15 minutes. With continuous stirring, bring gently to the boil and 
maintain at boiling point until solution is complete. Cool to 800, mix, pour and cool rapidly.  
  270 Care should be taken not to overhe at Desoxycholate Citrate Agar during preparation. It 
should not be remelted and the surface of the plates should be dried before use. 
 
Fluid Casein Digest -Soya Lecithin -Polysorbate 20 Medium  
 
 Pancreatic digest of casein     20 g 
 Soya lecithin       5 g 
 Polysorbate 20       40 ml 
 Water to       1000 ml 
 
Dissolve the pancreatic digest of casein and soya lecithin in water, heating in a water -bath at 
480 to 500 for about 30 minutes to effect solution. Add polysorbate 20, mix and dispense as desired.  
 
Fluid Lact ose Medium  
 
 Beef extract       3.0 g 
 Pancreatic digest of gelatin     5.0 g 
 Lactose       5.0 g 
 Water to       1000  ml 
 
Cool as quickly as possible after sterilization. Adjust the pH after sterilization to 6.9  ± 0.2. 
 
Lactose Broth Medium  
  Beef extract       3.0 g 
 Pancreatic digest of gelatin     5.0 g 
 Lactose       5.0 g 
 Water to       1000  ml 
 
Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 6.9±0.2. 
 
Levine Eosin -Methylene Blue Agar Medium  
 
 Pancreatic digest of gelatin     10.0 g 
 Dibasic potassium phosphate     2.0 g 
 Agar        15.0 g 
 Lactose       10.0 g 
 Eosin Y       400    mg 
 Methylene blue        65    mg 
 Water to       1000  ml 
 
Dissolve the pancreatic digest of gelatin, dibasic potassium phosphate and agar in water 
with warming and allow to cool. Just prior  to use, liquefy the gelled agar solution and the remaining 
ingredients, as solutions, in the following amounts and mix. For each 100 ml of the liquefied agar 
solution use 5 ml of a 20  per cent w/v solution of lactose, and 2 ml of a 2 per cent w/v solution of 
eosin Y, and 2 ml of a 0.33 per cent w/v solution of methylene blue. The finished medium may not 
be clear. Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 7.1±0.2. 
 
    
  271 MacConkey Agar Medium  
 
Pancreatic digest of gelatin     17.0 g 
 Peptone (meat and casein, equa l parts)   3.0 g 
 Lactose       10.0 g 
 Sodium chloride      5.0 g 
 Bile salts       1.5 g 
 Agar        13.5 g 
 Neutral red       30 mg 
 Crystal violet       1 mg 
 Water to       1000  ml 
 
Boil the mixture of solids and water for 1 minute to effect solution. Adjus t the pH after 
sterilisation to 7.1  ± 0.2. 
 
MacConkey Broth Medium  
 
Pancreatic digest of gelatin     20.0 g 
 Lactose       10.0 g 
 Dehydrated ox bile      5.0 g 
 Bromocresol purple      10 mg 
 Water to       1000  ml 
 Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 7.3±0. 2. 
 Mannitol -Salt Agar Medium  
 
Pancreatic digest of gelatin    5.0 g 
 Peptic digest of animal tissue    5.0 g 
 Beef extract      1.0 g 
 D-Mannitol      10.0 g 
 Sodium chloride     75.0 g 
 Agar       15.0 g 
 Phenol red      25 mg 
 Water to      1000  ml 
 
Mix, heat with frequent agitation and boil for 1 minute to effect solution. Adjust the pH 
after sterilisation to 7.4  ± 0.2. 
 
Nutrient Agar Medium : Nutrient broth gelled by the addition of 1 to 2 per cent w/v of agar.  
 
Nutrient Broth Medium  
 
Beef extract      10.0 g 
 Peptone      10.0 g 
 Sodium chloride     5 mg 
 Water to      1000  ml 
 
Dissolve with the aid of heat. Adjust the pH to 8.0 to 8.4 with 5M sodium hydroxide  and 
boil for 10 minutes. Filter, and sterilise by maintaining at 115
0 for 30 minutes and adjust the pH t o 
7.3±0.1. 
 
  272 Pseudomonas Agar Medium for Detection of Flourescein  
 
Pancreatic digest of casein    10.0 g 
 Peptic digest of animal tissue    10.0 g 
 Anhydrous dibasic potassium  phosphate  1.5 g 
 Magnesium sulphate hepta hydrate   1.5 g 
 Glycerin      10.0 ml 
 Agar      15.0 g 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Dissolve the solid components in water before adding glycerin. Heat with frequent agitation 
and boil for 1 minute to effect solution. Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 7.2  ± 0.2. 
 
Pseudomonas Agar Medium for Detecti on of Pyocyanin  
 
Pancreatic digest of gelatin    20.0 g 
 Anhydrous magnesium chloride   1.4 g 
 Anhydrous potassium sulphate   10.0 g 
 Agar       15.0 g 
Glycerin      10.0 ml 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Dissolve the solid components in water before adding glycerin. H eat with frequent agitation 
and boil for 1 minute to effect solution. Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 7.2  ± 0.2. 
 Sabouraud Dextrose Agar Medium  
  Dextrose     40 g 
 Mixture of equal parts of peptic   
digest of animal tissue and  
 Pancreatic digest of casein    10 g 
 Agar       15 g 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 Mix, and boil to effect solution. Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 5.6  ± 0.2. 
 
Sabouraud Dextrose Agar Medium with Antibiotics  
 
To 1 liter of Sabouraud Dextrose Agar Medium add 0.1 g of benzylpenicil lin sodium and 
0.1 g of tetracycline or alternatively add 50 mg of chloramphenicol immediately before use.  
 
Selenite F Broth  
 
 Peptone      5 g 
 Lactose      4 g 
 Disodium hydrogen phosphate   10 g 
 Sodium hydrogen selenite    4 g 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Disso lve, distribute in sterile containers and sterilise by maintaining at 100
0 for 30 minutes. 
 
 
  273 Fluid Selenite -Cystine Medium  
 
 Pancreatic digest of casein    5.0 g 
 Lactose      4.0 g 
 Sodium phosphate     10.0 g 
 Sodium hydrogen selenite    4.0 g 
 L-Cystine      10.0 mg 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Mix and heat to effect solution. Heat in flowing steam for 15 minutes. Adjust the final pH to 
7.0 ±  0.2. Do not sterilise. 
 Tetrathionate Broth Medium  
 
 Beef extract      0.9 g 
 Peptone      4.5 g 
 Yeast extract      1.8 g 
 Sodium chloride     4.5 g 
 Calcium carbonate     25.0 g 
 Sodium thiosulphate     40.7 g 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Dissolve the solids in water and heat the solution to boil. On the day of use, add a solution 
prepared by dissolving 5 g of potassium iodide and 6 g of iodine in 20 ml of water.  
 
Tetrathionate -Bile-Brilliant Green Broth Medium  
  Peptone      8.6 g 
 Dehydrated ox bile     8.0 g 
 Sodium chloride     6.4 g 
 Calcium carbonate     20.0 g 
 Potassium tetrathionate    20.0 g 
 Brilliant green      70 mg 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 Heat just to boiling; do not reheat. Adjust the pH so that after heating it is 7.0  ± 0.2. 
 Triple Sugar -Iron Agar Medium  
 
 Beef extract      3.0 g 
 Yeast extract      3.0 g 
 Peptone      20.0 g 
 Lactose      10.0 g 
 Sucrose      10.0 g 
 Dextrose mo nohydrate    1.0 g 
 Ferrous sulphate     0.2 g 
 Sodium chloride     5.0 g 
 Sodium thiosulphate     0.3 g 
 Phenol red      24 mg 
 Agar       12.0 g 
 Water to      1000 ml 
  274 Mix, allow standing for 15 minutes, bringing to boil and maintain at boiling point until 
solution is complete, mix, distributing in tubes and sterilising by maintaining at 1150 for 30 
minutes. Allow to stand in a sloped form with a butt about 2.5 cm long.  
 
Urea Broth Medium  
 
 Potassium dihydrogen    9.1 g 
orthophosphate   
Anhydrous disodium hydrogen   9.5 g 
phosphate  
Urea       20.0 g 
Yeast extract      0.1 g 
Phenol red      10 mg 
Water to      1000 ml 
 
Mix, sterilise by filtration and distribute aseptically in sterile containers.  
 Vogel -Johnson Agar Medium  
 
 Pancreatic digest of casein    10.0 g 
 Yeast  extract      5.0 g 
 Mannitol      10.0 g 
 Dibasic potassium phosphate    5.0 g 
 Lithium chloride     5.0 g 
 Glycerin      10.0 g 
 Agar       16.0 g 
 Phenol red      25.0 mg 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Boil the solution of solids for 1 minute. Sterilise, cool to betwe en 45
0 to 500 and add 20 ml of a 1  
per cent w/v sterile solution of potassium tellurite. Adjust the pH after sterilisation to 7.0  ± 0.2. 
 Xylose -Lysine -Desoxycholate Agar Medium  
 
 Xylose       3.5 g 
 L-Lysine       5.0 g 
 Lactose      7.5 g 
 Sucrose      7.5 g 
 Sodium chloride     5.0 g 
 Yeast extract      3.0 g 
 Phenol red      80 mg 
 Agar       13.5 g 
 Sodium desoxycholate    2.5 g 
 Sodium thiosulphate     6.8 g 
 Ferric ammonium citrate    800 mg 
 Water to      1000 ml 
 
Heat the mixture of solids and water, with swir ling, just to the boiling point. Do not 
overheat or sterilise. Transfer at once to a water -bath maintained at about 50
0 and pour into plates 
as soon as the medium has cooled. Adjust the final pH to 7.4 ±  0.2. 
 Sampling:  Use 10 ml or 10 g specimens for each  of the tests specified in the individual 
monograph.   275  
Precautions:  The microbial limit tests should be carried out under conditions designed to avoid 
accidental contamination during the test. The precautions taken to avoid contamination must be 
such that t hey do not adversely affect any micro -organisms that should be revealed in the test.  
 2.4.1. -  Total Aerobic Microbial Count  
 
Pretreat the sample of the product being examined as described below.  
 
Water -soluble products : Dissolve 10 g or dilute 10 ml of the preparation being examined, unless 
otherwise specified, in buffered sodium chloride -peptone solution pH 7.0 or any other suitable 
medium shown to have no antimicrobial activity under the conditions of test and adjust the volume to 100 ml with the same me dium. If necessary, adjust the pH to about 7. 
 
Products insoluble in water (non -fatty): Suspend 10 g or 10 ml of the preparation being 
examined, unless otherwise specified, in buffered sodium chloride -peptone solution pH 7.0 or any 
other suitable medium sh own not to have antimicrobial activity under the conditions of the test and 
dilute to 100 ml with the same medium. If necessary, divide the preparation being examined and 
homogenize the suspension mechanically.  
 
A suitable surface- active agent such as 0.1  per cent w/v of polysorbate 80 may be added to 
assist the suspension of poorly wettable substances. If necessary, adjust the pH of the suspension to about 7. 
 
Fatty products:  Homogenise 10 g or 10 ml of the preparation being examined, unless otherwise 
specifi ed, with 5 g of polysorbate 20 or polysorbate 80. If necessary, heat to not more than 40
0. Mix 
carefully while maintaining the temperature in the water -bath or in an oven. Add 85 ml of buffered 
sodium chloride -peptone solution pH 7.0 or any other suitable medium shown to have no 
antimicrobial activity under the conditions of the test, heated to not more than 400 if necessary. 
Maintain this temperature for the shortest time necessary for formation of an emulsion and in any 
case for not more than 30 minute s. If necessary, adjust the pH to about 7. 
 
Examination of the sample : Determine the total aerobic microbial count in the substance being 
examined by any of the following methods. 
 
Membrane filtration : Use membrane filters 50 mm in diameter and having a no minal pore size 
not greater than 0.45 µm the effectiveness of which in retaining bacteria has been established for 
the type of preparation being examined.   
Transfer 10 ml or a quantity of each dilution containing 1 g of the preparation being 
examined to each of two membrane filters and filter immediately. If necessary, dilute the pretreated preparation so that a colony count of 10 to 100 may be expected. Wash each membrane by filtering through it three or more successive quantities, each of about 100 ml, o f a suitable liquid such as 
buffered sodium chloride -peptone solution pH 7.0. For fatty substances add to the liquid 
polysorbate 20 or polysorbate 80. Transfer one of the membrane filters, intended for the 
enumeration of bacteria, to the surface of a plate of casein soyabean digest agar and the other, 
intended for the enumeration of fungi, to the surface of a plate of Sabouraud dextrose agar with antibiotics . 
 Incubate the plates for 5 days, unless a more reliable count is obtained in shorter time, at 30
0 
to 350 in the test for bacteria and 200 to 250 in the test for fungi. Count the number of colonies that 
are formed. Calculate the number of micro -organisms per g or per ml of the preparation being 
examined, if necessary counting bacteria and fungi separatel y.  276  
Plate count f or bacteria : Using Petri dishes 9 to 10 cm in diameter, add to each dish a mixture of 
1 ml of the pretreated preparation and about 15 ml of liquefied casein soyabean digest agar at not 
more than 450. Alternatively, spread the pretreated pr eparation on the surface of the solidified 
medium in a Petri dish of the same diameter. If necessary, dilute the pretreated preparation as 
described above so that a colony count of not more than 300 may be expected. Prepare at least two such Petri dishes using the same dilution and incubate at 30
0 to 350 for 5 days, unless a more 
reliable count is obtained in a shorter time. Count the number of colonies that are formed. Calculate the results using plates with the greatest number of colonies but taking 300 c olonies per plate as the 
maximum consistent with good evaluation.  
 Plate count f or fungi : Proceed as described in the test for bacteria but use Sabouraud dextrose 
agar with antibiotics in place of casein soyabean digest agar and incubate the plates at 20
0 to 250 
for 5 days, unless a more reliable count is obtained in a shorter time. Calculate the results using plates with not more than 100 colonies. 
 
Multiple -tube or serial dilution method: In each of fourteen test -tubes of similar size place 9.0 
ml of ster ile fluid soyabean casein digest medium. Arrange twelve of the tubes in four sets of three 
tubes each. Put aside one set of three tubes to serve as controls. Into each of three tubes of one set 
(“100”) and into fourth tube (A) pipette 1 ml of the solution of suspension of the test specimen and mix. From tube A pipette 1 ml of its contents into the one remaining tube (B) not included in the set and mix. These two tubes contain 100 mg (or 100 µl) and 10 mg (or 10 µl) of the specimen respectively. Into each of  the second set (“10”) of three tubes pipette 1 ml from tube  
 
A, and into each tube of the third set (“1”) pipette 1 ml from tube B. Discard the unused 
contents of tube A and B. Close well and incubate all of the tubes. Following the incubation period, examine the tubes for growth. The three control tubes remain clear. Observations in the tubes 
containing the test specimen, when interpreted by reference to Table 2.3, indicate the most probable number of micro- organisms per g or per ml of the test specimen.  
 
Table 2.3 – Most Probable Total Count by Multiple -Tube Or Serial Dilution Method  
 
Observed combination of numbers 
of tubes showing growth in each 
set   
No.of mg (or ml) of specimen per 
tube  Most probable number of micro -
organisms per g or per ml  
100 
(100 µl)  10 
(10 µl)  1 
(1 µl)  
3 
3 
3 3 3 
3 3 3 3 
2 1 0 >1100  
1100 
500 200 
3 
3 3 3 2 
2 2 2 3 
2 1 0 290 
210 150 
90  277 3 
3 
3 3 1 
1 1 1 3 
2 1 0 160 
120 
70 40 
3 
3 3 3 0 
0 0 0 3 
2 1 0 95 
60 40 23 
 
 
2.4.2. -  Tests for S pecified M icro-Organisms  
 
Pretreatment of th e sample being examined:  Proceed as described under the test for total 
aerobic microbial count but using lactose broth or any other suitable medium shown to have no antimicrobial activity under the conditions of test in place of buffered sodium chloride -peptone 
solution pH 7.0. 
 
Escherichia coli  : Place the prescribed quantity in a sterile screw -capped container, add 50 ml of 
nutrient broth, shake, allow to stand for 1 hour (4 hours for gelatin) and shake again. Loosen the 
cap and incubate at 37
 0 for 18 t o 24 hours. 
 Primary test : Add 1.0 ml of the enrichment culture to a tube containing 5 ml of MacConkey broth. 
Incubate in a water -bath at 36
0 to 380 for 48 hours. If the contents of the tube show acid and gas 
carry out the secondary test.  
 Secondary test : Add 0.1 ml of the contents of the tubes containing (a) 5 ml of MacConkey broth, 
and (b) 5 ml of peptone water. Incubate in a water -bath at 43.5
0 to 44.50 for 24 hours and examine 
tube (a) for acid and gas and tube (b) for indole. To test for indole, add 0. 5 ml of Kovac’s reagent, 
shake well and allow to stand for 1 minute; if a red colour is produced in the reagent layer indole is present. The presence of acid and gas and of indole in the secondary test indicates the presence of Escherichia coli . 
Carry out a control test by repeating the primary and secondary tests adding 1.0 ml of the 
enrichment culture and a volume of broth containing 10 to 50 Escherichia coli  (NCTC 9002) 
organisms, prepared from a 24- hour culture in nutrient broth, to 5 ml of MacConkey br oth. The test 
is not valid unless the results indicate that the control contains Escherichia coli . 
 Alternative tes t:  By means of an inoculating loop, streak a portion from the enrichment culture 
(obtained in the previous test) on the surface of MacConkey  agar medium. Cover and invert the 
dishes and incubate. Upon examination, if none of the colonies are brick -red in colour and have a 
surrounding zone of precipitated bile the sample meets the requirements of the test for the absence of Escherichia coli . 
 
If the colonies described above are found, transfer the suspect colonies individually to the 
surface of Levine eosin -methylene blue agar medium, plated on Petri dishes. Cover and invert the 
plates and incubate. Upon examination, if none of the colonies exhi bits both a characteristic 
metallic sheen under reflected light and a blue- black appearance under transmitted light, the sample 
meets the requirements of the test for the absence of Escherichia coli . The presence of Escherichia 
coli may be confirmed by fur ther suitable cultural and biochemical tests.  
  278 Salmonella : Transfer a quantity of the pretreated preparation being examined containing 1 g or 1 
ml of the product to 100 ml of nutrient broth in a sterile screw -capped jar, shake, allow to stand for 
4 hours and shake again. Loosen the cap and incubate at 350 to 370 for 24 hours. 
 
Primary test :  Add 1.0 ml of the enrichment culture to each of the two tubes containing (a) 10 ml 
of selenite F broth and (b) tetrathionate -bile-brilliant green broth and incubate at  360 to 380 for 48 
hours. From each of these two cultures subculture on at least two of the following four agar media: bismuth sulphate agar, brilliant green agar, deoxycholatecitrate agar and xylose -lysine -
deoxycholate agar. Incubate the plates at 36
0 to 380 for 18 to 24 hours. Upon examination, if none 
of the colonies conforms to the description given in Table 2.4, the sample meets the requirements of the test for the absence of the genus Salmonella.  
If any colonies conforming to the description in Table  2.4 are produced, carry out the 
secondary test.  
 Secondary test : Subculture any colonies showing the characteristics given in Table 2.4  in triple 
sugar -iron agar by first inoculating the surface of the slope and then making a stab culture with the 
same in oculating needle, and at the same time inoculate a tube of urea broth. Incubate at 36
0 to 380 
for 18 to 24 hours. The formation of acid and gas in the stab culture (with or without concomitant blackening) and the absence of acidity from the surface growth in the triple sugar iron agar, together with the absence of a red colour in the urea broth, indicate the presence of Salmonella. If acid but no gas is produced in the stab culture, the identity of the organisms should be confirmed by agglutination tests.  
 Carry out the control test by repeating the primary and secondary tests using 1.0 ml of the enrichment culture and a volume of broth containing 10 to 50 Salmonella abony  (NCTC 6017) 
organisms, prepared from a 24- hour culture in nutrient broth, for the inoc ulation of the tubes (a) 
and (b). The test is not valid unless the results indicate that the control contains Salmonella. 
Table  2.4 – Test for Salmonella  
 
Medium  Description  of colony  
 
Bismuth sulphite agar  
 Brilliant green agar  
   Deoxycholate -citrate a gar 
  Xylose -lysine -desoxy -cholate agar  Black or green  
 Small, transparent and colourless, or opaque, pinkish or white (frequently surrounded by a pink or red zone)  
 Colourless and opaque, with or without black centers  
 Red with or without black centres  
 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa: Pretreat the preparation being examined as described above and 
inoculate 100 ml of fluid soyabean- casein digest medium with a quantity of the solution, 
suspension or emulsion thus obtained containing 1 g or 1 ml of the preparation being examined. Mix and incubate at 35
0 to 370 for 24 to 48 hours. Examine the medium for growth and if growth is 
present, streak a portion of the medium on the surface of cetrimide agar medium, each plated on Petri dishes. Cover and incubate at 35
0 to 370 for 18 to 24 hours. 
 
If, upon examination, none of the plates contains colonies having the characteristics listed in 
Table 3 for the media used, the sample meets the requirement for freedom from Pseudomonas  279 aeruginosa. If any colonies conforming to the de scription in Table 2.5 are produced, carry out the 
oxidase and pigent tests.  
 
Streak representative suspect colonies from the agar surface of cetrimide agar on the 
surfaces of Pseudomonas  agar medium for detection of fluorescein and Pseudomonas  agar medium  
for detection of pyocyanin contained in Petri dishes. Cover and invert the inoculated media and 
incubate at 330 to 370 for not less than 3 days. Examine the streaked surfaces under ultra -violet 
light. Examine the plates to determine whether colonies confo rming to the description in Table 2.5  
are present.  
 
If growth of suspect colonies occurs, place 2 or 3 drops of a freshly prepared 1per cent w/v 
solution of N ,N,N1,N1-tetramethyl -4-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride on filter paper and smear 
with the colony;  if there is no development of a pink colour, changing to purple, the sample meets 
the requirements of the test for the absence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 
 
Table 2.4 – Tests for Pseudomonas aeruginosa  
 
Medium  Characteristic 
colonial 
morphology  Fluorescence  
in UV light  Oxidase test  Gram stain  
Cetrimide agar  Generally 
greenish  Greenish  Positive  Negative 
rods 
Pseudomonas agar 
medium for detection of fluorescein  Generally 
colourless to 
yellowish  Yellowish  Positive  Negative 
rods 
Pseudomonas agar 
medium for detection of pyocyanin  Generally 
greenish  Blue  Positive  Negative 
rods 
 
 
Staphylococcus aureus : Proceed as described under Pseudomonas aeruginosa. If, upon 
examination of the incubated plates, none of them contains colonies having the characteristics listed  
in Table 4 for the media used, the sample meets the requirements for the absence of Staphylococcus 
aureus . 
 
If growth occurs, carry out the coagulase test. Transfer representative suspect colonies from 
the agar surface of any of the media listed in Table 2.5 to individual tubes, each containing 0.5 ml 
of mammalian, preferably rabbit or horse, plasma with or without additives. Incubate in water -bath 
at 370 examining the tubes at 3 hours and subsequently at suitable intervals up to 24 hours. If no 
coagulatio n in any degree is observed, the sample meets the requirements of the test for the absence 
of Staphylococcus aureus . 
Table 2.5 – Tests for Staphylococcus aureus  
 
Selective medium  Characteristic colonial morphology  
 Gram stain  
Vogel -Johnson agar  Black surr ounded by yellow zones  Positive cocci (in 
clusters)  
Mannitol -salt agar  Yellow colonies with yellow zones  Positive cocci (in 
clusters)  
Baird -Parker agar  Black, shiny, surrounded by clear zones 
of 2 to 5 mm  Positive cocci (in 
clusters)  
 
  280 Validity of the t ests for total aerobic microbial count :  
 
Grow the following test strains separately in tubes containing fluid soyabean -casein digest 
medium at 300 to 350 for 18 to 24 hours or, for Candida albicans , at 200 for 48 hours. 
 
Staphylococcus aureus  (ATCC 6538; NCTC 10788)  
Bacillus subtilis   (ATCC 6633; NCIB 8054)  
Escherichia coli   (ATCC 8739; NCIB 8545)  
Candida albicans   (ATCC 2091; ATCC 10231)  
 
Dilute portions of each of the cultures using buffered sodium chloride -peptone solution pH 
7.0 to make test suspensions containing about 100 viable micro- organisms per ml. Use the 
suspension of each of the micro- organisms separately as a control of the counting methods, in the 
presence and absence of the preparation being examined, if necessary.  
 
A count for any of the te st organisms differing by not more than a factor of 10 from the 
calculated value for the inoculum should be obtained. To test the sterility of the medium and of the diluent and the aseptic performance of the test, carry out the total aerobic microbial coun t method 
using sterile buffered sodium chloride -peptone solution pH 7.0 as the test preparation. There should 
be no growth of micro -organisms.  
 Validity of the tests  for specified micro -organisms:  Grow separately the test strains of 
Staphylococcus aureus  and Pseudomonas aeruginosa in fluid soyabean -casein digest medium and 
Escherichia coli  and Salmonella typhimurium at 30
0 to 350 for 18 to 24 hours. Dilute portions of 
each of the cultures using buffered sodium chloride -peptone solution pH 7.0 to make test 
suspensions containing about 103 viable micro -organisms per ml. Mix equal volume of each 
suspension and use 0.4 ml (approximately 102 micro -organisms of each strain) as an inoculum in 
the test for E. coli, Salmonella, P. aeruginosa and S. aureus , in the pr esence and absence of the 
preparation being examined, if necessary. A positive result for the respective strain of micro -
organism should be obtained. 
 
Microbial Contamination Limits  
 
S.No.       Parameters                                     Permissible limits  
 
1.           Staphylococcus aureus /g.                 Absent 
2.           Salmonella sp./g .                Absent  
3.   Pseudomonas aeruginosa/g    Absent  
4.           Escherichia coli                                  Absent  
5.           Total microbia l plate count (TPC)                105/g* 
6.           Total Yeast & Mould                        103/g 
 
 *For topical use, the limit shall be 10
7/g. 
 2.5. -  PESTICIDE RESIDUE  
 
Definition :  For the purposes of the Pharmacopoeia, a pesticide is any substanc e or mixture of 
substances intended for preventing, destroying or controlling any pest, unwanted species of plants 
or animals causing harm during or otherwise interfering with the production, processing , storage, 
transport or marketing of vegetable drugs. The item includes substances intended for use as growth-regulators, defoliants or desiccants and any substance applied to crops either before or after harvest to protect the commodity from deterioration during storage and transport.   281  
Limits : Unless otherwi se indicated in the monograph, the drug to be examined at least complies 
with the limits indicated in Table - 1, The limits applying to pesticides that are not listed in the table 
and whose presence is suspected for any reason comply with the limits set by European Community 
directives 76/895 and 90/642, including their annexes and successive updates. Limits for pesticides 
that are not listed in Table. -1 nor in EC directives are calculated using the following expression:  
 
                                                                 ADI x M  
                                                              MDD x 100  
 
ADI = A cceptable D aily Intake, as published by FAO -WHO, in milligrams per  
kilogram of body mass, 
 M = body mass in kilograms (60 kg),  
 MDD  = dai ly dose of the drug, in kilograms.  
 
If the drug is intended for the preparation of extracts, tinctures or other pharmaceutical 
forms whose preparation method modifies the content of pesticides in the finished product, the limits are calculated using the fo llowing expression: 
                                                              ADI x M x E  
                                                             MDD x 100  
 E = E xtraction factor of the method of preparation, determined experimentally.  
 
Higher limits can also be authorised, in exceptional cases, especially when a plant requires a 
particular cultivation method or has a metabolism or a structure that gives rise to a higher than normal content of pesticides.  
The competent authority may grant total o r partial exemption from the test when the 
complete history (nature and quantity of the pesticides used, date of each treatment during cultivation and after the harvest) of the treatment of the batch is known and can be checked precisely.  
 Sampling  
 
Method : For containers up to 1 kg, take one sample from the total content, thoroughly mixed, 
sufficient for the tests. For containers between 1 kg and 5 kg, take three samples, equal in volume, 
from the upper, middle and lower parts of the container, each being sufficient to carry out the tests. Thoroughly mix the samples and take from the mixture an amount sufficient to carry out the tests. For containers of more than 5 kg, take three samples, each of at least 250 g from the upper, middle and lower parts of the container. Thoroughly mix the samples and take from the mixture an amount sufficient to carry out the tests.   Size of sampling : If the number (n) of containers is three or fewer, take samples from each 
container as indicated above under Method. If the num ber of containers is more than three, take 
n+1 samples for containers as indicated under Method, rounding up to the nearest unit if necessary.  
  282 The samples are to be analysed immediately to avoid possible degradation of the residues. If this is 
not possibl e, the samples are stored in air -tight containers suitable for food contact, at a temperature 
below 00, protected from light.  
 
Reagents : All reagents and solvents are free from any contaminants, especially pesticides, that 
might interfere with the analysis. It is often necessary to use special quality solvents or, if this is not 
possible, solvents that have recently been re -distilled in an apparatus made entirely of glass. In any 
case, suitable blank tests must be carried out.  
 
Apparatus : Clean the apparat us and especially glassware to ensure that they are free from 
pesticides, for example, soak for at least 16 h in a solution of phosphate -free detergent, rinse with 
large quantities of distilled water and wash with acetone and hexane or heptane . 
 
2.5.1. -  Qualitative and Quantitative A nalysis of P esticide R esidues  
 
The analytical procedures used are validated according to the regulations in force. In particular, 
they satisfy the following criteria : 
- the chosen method, especially the purification steps, are su itable for the combination 
pesticide residue/substance to be analysed and not susceptible to interference from co -
extractives; the limits of detection and quantification are measured for each pesticide- matrix 
combination to be analysed. 
 
- between 70 per cen t to 110 per cent of each pesticide is recovered.  
 
- the repeatability of the method is not less than the values indicated in Table 2.6. 
 
- the reproducibility of the method is not less than the values indicated in Table 2.7 . 
 
- the concentration of test and ref erence solutions and the setting of the apparatus are such 
that a linear response is obtained from the analytical detector.  
Table - 2.6 
Substance  Limit (mg/kg)  
Alachlor  0.02 
Aldrin and Dieldrin (sum of )  0.05 
Azinphos -methyl  1.0 
Bromopropylate  3.0 
Chlo rdane (sum of cis -, trans – and Oxythlordane)  0.05 
Chlorfenvinphos  0.5 
Chlorpyrifos  0.2 
Chlorpyrifos -methyl  0.1 
Cypermethrin (and isomers)  1.0 
DDT (sum of p,p -‘DDT, o,p -‘DDT, p,p -‘DDE and p,p -‘TDE  1.0 
Deltamethrin  0.5 
Diazinon  0.5 
Dichlorvos  1.0 
Dithiocarbamates (as CS2)  2.0 
Endosulfan (sum of isomers and Endosulfan sulphate)  3.0 
Endrin  0.05 
Ethion  2.0 
Fenitrothion  0.5 
Fenvalerate  1.5 
Fonofos  0.05  283 Heptachlor (sum of Heptachlor and Heptachlorepoxide)  0.05 
Hexachlorobenzene  0.1 
Hexachlorocyc lohexane isomers (other than γ)  0.3 
Lindane (γ -Hexachlorocyclohexane)  0.6 
Malathion  1.0 
Methidathion  0.2 
Parathion  0.5 
Parathion -methyl  0.2 
Permethrin  1.0 
Phosalone  0.1 
Piperonyl butoxide  3.0 
Pirimiphos -methyl  4.0 
Pyrethrins (sum of)  3.0 
Quinto zene (sum of quintozene, pentachloroaniline and methyl 
pentachlorophenyl sulphide)  1.0 
 
Table - 2.7  
 
Concentration of the 
pesticide (mg/kg)  Repeatability (difference, ± 
mg/kg)  Reproducibility (difference, ± 
mg/kg)  
0.010  
0.100 
1.000  0.005  
0.025 
0.125  0.01 
0.05 
0.25 
 
2.5.2. -  Test for P esticides  
 
Organochlorine, Organophosphorus and Pyrethroid Insecticides  
 
The following methods may be used, in connection with the general method above, 
depending on the substance being examined, it may be necessary to modify , sometimes extensively, 
the procedure described hereafter. In any case, it may be necessary to use, in addition, another column with a different polarity or another detection method (mass spectrometry) or a different method (immunochemical methods) to confirm the results obtained.  
 
This procedure is valid only for the analysis of samples of vegetable drugs containing less 
than 15 per cent of water. Samples with a higher content of water may be dried, provided it has been shown that the drying procedure doe s not affect significantly the pesticide content.  
 
1. Extraction  
 
To 10 g of the substance being examined, coarsely powdered, add 100 ml of acetone and 
allow to stand for 20 min. Add 1 ml of a solution containing 1.8 µg/ml of car bophenothion in 
toluene .. Homogenise using a high- speed blender for 3 min. Filter and wash the filter cake with two 
quantities, each of 25 ml, of acetone. Combine the filtrate and the washings and heat using a rotary 
evaporator at a temperature not exceeding 40
0 C until the solvent  has almost completely 
evaporated. To the residue add a few milliliters of toluene and heat again until the acetone is 
completely removed. Dissolve the residue in 8 ml of toluene. Filter through a membrane filter (45 
µm), rinse the flask and the filter with toluene  and dilute to 10.0 ml with the same solvent (solution 
A). 
 
  
  284 2. Purification  
 
2.1 Organochlorine, organophosphorus and pyrethroid insecticides :  
 
Examine by size -exclusion chromatography.  
The chromatographic procedure may be carried out using:  
 
- a stainless steel column 0.30 m long and 7.8 mm in internal diameter packed with styre :e-
divinylbenzene copolymer  (5 µm).  
 
- as mobile phase toluene  at a flow rate of 1 ml/min.  
 
Performance of the column: Inject 100 µl of a solution containing 0.5 g/l of me thyl red and 0.5 g/l 
of oracet blue in toluene and proceed with the chromatography. The column is not suitable unless 
the colour of the eluate changes from orange to blue at an elution volume of about 10.3 ml. If 
necessary calibrate the column, using a sol ution containing, in toluene, at a suitable concentration, 
the insecticide to be analysed with the lowest molecular mass (for example, dichlorvos) and that with the highest molecular mass (for example, deltamethrin). Determine which fraction of the eluate contains both insecticides.  Purification of the test solution : Inject a suitable volume of solution A (100 µl to 500 µl) and 
proceed with the chromatography. Collect the fraction as determined above (solution B). Organophosphorus insecticides are usually eluted between 8.8 ml and 10.9 ml. Organochlorine and pyrethroid insecticides are usually eluted between 8.5 ml and 10.3 ml. 
 
2.2 Organochlorine and pyrethroid insecticides : In a chromatography column, 0.10 m long and 5 
mm in internal diameter, introduce a  piece of defatted cotton and 0.5 g of silica gel treated as 
follows: heat silica gel for chromatography in an oven at 150
0 for at least 4 h. Allow to cool and 
add dropwise a quantity of water  corresponding to 1.5 per cent of the mass of silica gel used; shake 
vigorously until agglomerates have disappeared and continue shaking for 2 h using a mechanical shaker. Condition the column using 1.5 ml of hexane.  Prepacked columns containing about 0.50 g 
of a suitable silica gel may also be used provided they are  previously validated. 
 
Concentrate solution B in a current of helium for chromatography or oxygen -free nitrogen   
almost to dryness and dilute to a suitable volume with toluene  (200 µl to 1 ml according to the 
volume injected in the preparation of solution B). Transfer quantitatively onto the column and proceed with the chromatography using 1.8 ml of toluene as the mobile phase. Collect the eluate 
(solution C).  
2.5.3. -  Quantitative A nalysis  
 
A. Organophosphorus insecticides : Examine by gas chromatography , using carbophenothion as 
internal standard. It may be necessary to use a second internal standard to identify possible 
interference with the peak corresponding to carbophenothion.  Test solution: Concentrate solution B in a current of helium for chromatography  almost to dryness 
and dilute to 100 µl with toluene. 
 
Reference solution:  Prepare at least three solutions in toluene containing the insecticides to be 
determined and carbophenothion at concentrations suitable for plotting a calibration curve.  
 
The chromatographic procedure may be carried out using:  
  285 - a fused -silica column 30 m long and 0.32 mm in internal diameter the internal wall of which 
is covered with a layer 0.25 µm thick of poly (dimethyl) siloxane . 
 
- hydrogen for chromatography  as the carrier gas. Other gases such as helium for 
chromatography or nitrogen for chromatography may also be used provided the 
chromatography is suitably validated.  
 - a phosphorus -nitrogen flame -ionisation detector or a atomic emission spectrometry detector.  
Maintaining the temperature of the column at 80
0 for 1 min, then raising it at a rate of 300 
/min to 1500, maintaining at 1500 for 3 min, then raising the temperature at a rate of 40/min to 2800 
and maintaining at this temperature for 1 min and maintaining the temperature of the injector port at 250
0 and that of the detector at 2750. Inject the chosen volume of each solution. When the 
chromatograms are recorded in the prescribed conditions, the relative retention times are approximately those listed in Table 2.8 Calculate the content of each insecticide from the peak 
areas and the concentrations of the solutions. 
 
B. Organochlorine and P yrethroid Insecticides : Examine by gas chromatography, using 
carbophenothion as the internal standard. It may be necessary to use a seco nd internal standard to 
identify possible interference with the peak corresponding to carbophenothion. 
 Test solution: Concentrate solution C in a current of helium for chromatography or oxygen -free 
nitrogen  almost to dryness and dilute to 500 µl with tol uene.  
 Reference solution:  Prepare at least three solutions in toluene containing the insecticides to be 
determined and carbophenothion at concentrations suitable for plotting a calibration curve.  
 
Table 2.8-  Relative R etention Times of P esticides  
 
Substan ce Relative retention times  
Dichlorvos  0.20 
Fonofos  0.50 
Diazinon  0.52 
Parathion -methyl  0.59 
Chlorpyrifos -methyl  0.60 
Pirimiphos -methyl  0.66 
Malathion  0.67 
Parathion  0.69 
Chlorpyrifos  0.70 
Methidathion  0.78 
Ethion  0.96 
Carbophenothion  1.00 
Azinphos -methyl  1.17 
Phosalon  1.18 
The chromatographic procedure may be carried out using:  
 
- a fused silica column 30 m long and 0.32 mm in internal diameter the internal wall of which is covered with a layer 0.25 µm thick of poly (dimethyl diphenyl) siloxane.  
- hydrogen for chromatography  as the carrier gas. Other gases such as helium for 
chromatography or nitrogen for chromatography  may also be used, provided the 
chromatography is suitably validated.  
- an electron -capture detector.  
- a device allowing direct col d on- column injection.  286 maintaining the temperature of the column at 800 for 1 min, then raising it at a rate of 300/min to 
1500, maintaining at 1500 for 3 min, then raising the temperature at a rate of 40/min to 2800 and 
maintaining at this temperature for  1 min and maintaining the temperature of the injector port at 
2500 and that of the detector at 2750. Inject the chosen volume of each solution. When the 
chromatograms are recorded in the prescribed conditions, the relative retention times are 
approximatel y those listed in Table 2.9. Calculate the content of each insecticide from the peak 
areas and the concentrations of the solutions. 
Table 2.9-  Relative R etention T imes of I nsecticides  
 
Substance  Relative retention times  
α-Hexachlorocyclohexane  0.44 
Hexachlorobenzene  0.45 
β-Hexachlorocyclohexane  0.49 
Lindane  0.49 
δ-Hexachlorocyclohexane  0.54 
ε-Hexachlorocyclohexane  0.56 
Heptachlor  0.61 
Aldrin  0.68 
cis-Heptachlor -epoxide  0.76 
o,p-‘DDE  0.81 
α-Endosulfan  0.82 
Dield rin 0.87 
p,p-‘DDE  0.87 
o,p-‘DDD  0.89 
Endrin  0.91 
β-Endosulfan  0.92 
o,p-‘DDT  0.95 
Carbophenothion  1.00 
p,p-‘DDT  1.02 
cis-Permethrin  1.29 
trans -Permethrin  1.31 
Cypermethrin*  1.40 
Fenvalerate*  1.47 and 1.49  
Deltamethrin  1.54 
 *The substance shows  several peaks.  
 
2.6. -  GAS CHROMATOGRAPHY  
 
Gas chromatography (GC) is a chromatographic separation technique based on the 
difference in the distribution of species between two non- miscible phases in which the mobile 
phase is a carrier gas moving through or passing the stationary phase contained in a column. It is 
applicable to substances or their derivatives, which are volatilized under the temperatures employed.  
 
GC is based on mechanisms of adsorption, mass distribution or size exclusion. 
 
Apparatus  
 
The apparatus consists of an injector, a chromatographic column contained in an oven, a 
detector and a data acquisition system (or an integrator or a chart recorder). The carrier gas flows 
through the column at a controlled rate or pressure and then through the detector.   287 The chromatography is carried out either at a constant temperature or according to a given 
temperature programme.  
 
Injectors  
 
Direct injections  of solutions are the usual mode of injection, unless otherwise prescribed in 
the monograph. Inject ion may be carried out either directly at the head of the column using a 
syringe or an injection valve, or into a vaporization chamber which may be equipped with a stream 
splitter.  
 Injections of vapour phase  may be effected by static or dynamic head -space injection 
systems.  
 
Dynamic head -space (purge and trap) injection systems include a sparging device by which 
volatile substances in solution are swept into an absorbent column maintained at a low temperature. Retained substances are then desorbed into the  mobile phase by rapid heating of the absorbent 
column. 
 Static head -space injection systems include a thermostatically controlled sample heating 
chamber in which closed vials containing solid or liquid samples are placed for a fixed period of time to allo w the volatile components of the sample to reach equilibrium between the non- gaseous 
phase and the vapour phase. After equilibrium has been established, a predetermined amount of the head -space of the vial is flushed into the gas chromatograph.  
 
Stationary Phases  
 Stationary phases are contained in columns, which may be:  
 
- a capillary column of fused -silica close wall is coated with the stationary phase.  
- a column packed with inert particles impregnated with the stationary phase.  
- a column packed with solid st ationary phase.  
 
Capillary columns are 0.1 mm to 0.53 mm in internal diam eter (Ф) and 5 to 6 m in length.  
The liquid or stationary phase, which may be chemically bonded to the inner surface, is a film 0.1 µm to 5.0 µm thick.  
Packed columns, made of glass or metal, are usually 1 m to 3 m in length with an internal 
diameter (Ф)  of 2 mm to 4 mm. Stationary phases usually consist of porous polymers or solid 
supports impregnated with liquid phase.  
Supports for analysis of polar compounds on columns packed with low -capacity, low -
polarity stationary phase must be inert to avoid peak tailing. The reactivity of support materials can 
be reduced by silanising prior to coating with liquid phase. Acid- washed, flux -calcinated 
diatomaceous earth is often used. Materials are available in various particle sizes, the most commonly used particle s are in the ranges of 150 µm to 180 µm and 125 µm to 150 µm.   
 
Mobile Phases  
 
Retention time and peak efficiency depend on the carrier gas flow rate; retention time is 
directly proportional to column length and resolution is proportional to the square root of the column length. For packed columns, the carrier gas flow rate is usually expressed in milliliters per minute at atmospheric pressure and room temperature, flow rate is measured at the detector outlet, 
either with a calibrated mechanical device or with a bubble tube, while the column is at operating  288 temperature. The linear velocity of the carrier gas through a packed column is inversely 
proportional to the square root of the internal diameter of the column for a given flow volume. Flow rates of 60 m l/min in a 4 mm internal diameter column and 15 ml/min in a 2 mm internal 
diameter column, give identical linear velocities and thus similar retention times.  
 
Helium or nitrogen is usually employed as the carrier gas for packed columns, whereas 
commonly us ed carrier gases for capillary columns are nitrogen, helium and hydrogen.  
 Detectors  
 
Flame -ionisation detectors are usually employed but additional detectors which may be used 
include: electron -capture, nitrogen -phosphorus, mass spectrometric, thermal conductivity, Fourier 
transform infrared spectrophotometric and others, depending on the purpose of the analysis.  
 
Method  
 
Equilibrate the column, the injector and the detector at the temperatures and the gas flow 
rates specified in the monograph until a stab le baseline is achieved. Prepare the test solution (s) and 
the reference solutions (s) as prescribed. The solutions must be free from solid particles. 
 
Criteria for assessing the suitability of the system are described in the chapter on 
Chromatographic separation techniques. The extent to which adjustments of parameters of the 
chromatographic system can be made to satisfy the criteria of system suitability are also given in this chapter.  
 2.7. -  TEST FOR AFLATOXINS  
 
Caution : Aflatoxins are highly dangerous and extreme care should be exercised in handling 
aflatoxin materials.  
 
This test is provided to detect the possible presence of aflatoxins B
1, B2, G 1 and G 2 in any 
material of plant origin. Unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph, use the following 
method. 
 
Zinc Acetate – Aluminum Chloride Reagent :  Dissolve 20 g of zinc acetate and 5 g of aluminum 
chloride  in sufficient water to make 100 ml.  
 Sodium Chloride Solution:  Dissolve 5 g of sodium chloride  in 50 ml of purified water.  
 Test Solutio n 1: Grind about 200 g of plant material to a fine powder. Transfer about 50 g of the 
powdered material, accurately weighed, to a glass -stoppered flask. Add 200 ml of a mixture of 
methanol  and water  (17: 3). Shake vigorously by mechanical means for not les s than 30 minutes 
and filter. [Note – If the solution has interfering plant pigments, proceed as directed for Test 
Solution 2.]  Discard the first 50 ml of the filtrate and collect the next 40 ml portion. Transfer the 
filtrate to a separatory funnel. Add 40 ml of s odium  chloride solution and 25 ml of hexane  and 
shake for 1 minute. Allow the layers to separate and transfer the lower aqueous layer to a second 
separatory funnel. Extract the aqueous layer in the separatory funnel twice, each time with 25 ml of methylene chloride, by shaking for 1 minute. Allow the layers to separate each time, separate the 
lower organic layer and collect the combined organic layers in a 125 ml conical flask. Evaporate the organic solvent to dryness on a water bath. Cool the residue. If interferences exist in the residue, proceed as directed for Cleanup Procedure;  otherwise, dissolve the residue obtained above in 0.2 
ml of a mixture of chloroform  and acetonitrile  (9.8 : 0.2) and shake by mechanical means if 
necessary.   289 Test Solution  2: Collect 100 ml of the filtrate from the start of the flow and transfer to a 250 ml 
beaker. Add 20 ml of Zinc Acetate- Aluminum Chloride Reagent and 80 ml of water. Stir and allow 
to stand for 5 minutes. Add 5 g of a suitable filtering aid, such as diatomaceous earth, mix and 
filter. Discard the first 50 ml  of the filtrate, and collect the next 80 ml portion. Proceed as directed 
for Test Solution 1, beginning with “Transfer the filtrate to a separatory funnel.”  
 Cleanup Procedure : Place a medium -porosity sintered -glass disk or a glass wool plug at the 
bottom of a 10 mm x 300 mm chromatographic tube. Prepare slurry  of 2 g of silica gel with a 
mixture of ethyl ether  and hexane  (3: 1), pour the slurry into the column and wash with 5 m l of the 
same solvent mix ture. Allow the absorbent to settle and add to the top of the column a layer of 1.5 
g of anhydrous sodium sulfate . Dissolve the residue obtained above in 3 ml of methylene chloride  
and transfer it to the column. Rinse the flask twice with 1 ml portions of methylene chloride, transfer the rinses to the column and elute at a rate not greater than 1 ml per minute. Add successively to the column 3 ml of hexane , 3 ml of diethyl ether  and 3 ml of methylene chloride; 
elute at a rate not greater than 3 ml per minute; and discard the eluates. Add to the column 6 mL of a mixture of methylene chloride and acetone (9 : 1) and elute at a rate not greater than 1 ml per 
minute, preferably without the aid of vacuum. Collect this eluate in a small vial, add a boiling chip if necessary and evaporate to dryness on a water bath. Dissolve the residue in 0.2 ml of a mixture of 
chloroform  and acetonitrile  (9.8 : 0.2) and shake by mechanical means if necessary.  
 
Aflatoxin Solution:  Dissolve accurately weighed quantities of aflatoxin  B
1, aflatoxin B 2, aflatoxin 
G1 and aflatoxin G 2 in a mixture of chloroform  and acetonitrile  (9.8: 0.2) to obtain a solution 
having concentrations of 0.5 μg /per m l each  for aflatoxin B 1 and G1 and 0.1μ g per m l each for 
aflatoxins  for B2  and G 2.  
 Procedure : Separately apply 2.5 µl, 5 µl, 7.5 µl and 10 µl of the Aflatoxin Solution and three 10 µl 
applications of either Test Solution 1 or Test Solution 2 to a suitable thin- layer chromatographic 
plate coated with a 0.25 -mm layer of chromatographic silica gel mixture. Superimpose 5 µl of the 
Aflatoxin  Solution on one of the three 10 µl applications of the Test Solution. Allow the spots to dry 
and develop the chromatogram in an unsaturated chamber containing a solvent system consisting of 
a mixture of chloroform , acetone  and isopropyl alcohol  (85:10:5) until the solvent front has moved 
not less than 15 cm from the origin. Remove the plate from the developing chamber, mark the solvent front and allow the plate to air -dry. Locate the spots on the plate by examinati on under UV 
light at 365 nm: the four applications of the Aflatoxin Solution appear as four clearly separated blue fluorescent spots; the spot obtained from the Test Solution that was superimposed on the Aflatoxin Solution is no more intense than that of t he corresponding Aflatoxin Solution;  and no spot from any 
of the other Test Solutions corresponds to any of the spots obtained from the applications of the  
Aflatoxin Solution. If any spot of aflatoxins is obtained in the Test Solution, match the position of 
each fluorescent spot of the Test Solution with those of the Aflatoxin Solution to identify the type of aflatoxin present. The intensity of the aflatoxin spot, if present in the Test Solution, when compared 
with that of the corresponding aflatoxin in the  Aflatoxin Solution will give an approximate 
concentration of aflatoxin in the Test Solution.          
 
Permissible Limit of Aflatoxins * 
 
S.No           Aflatoxins                                    Permissible Limit  
 
 
1.                 B 1                                                      0.5 ppm  
2.         G 1            0.5 ppm         
3.                 B 2                                                 0.1 ppm   
4.         G 2.                                                      0.1 ppm  
*For Domestic use only 290 APPENDIX -  3 
 
3.1. PHYSICAL TESTS AND DETERMINATIONS  
 
3.1.1.  - REFRACTIVE INDEX 
 
 The refractive index ( η) of a substance with reference to air is the ratio of the sine of the 
angle of incidence to the sine of the angle of refraction of a beam of l ight passing from air into the 
substance. It varies with the wavelength of the light used in its measurement. 
  Unless otherwise prescribed, the refractive index is measured at 25
0 (±0.5) with reference to 
the wavelength of the D line of sodium (λ 589.3 nm ). The temperature should be carefully adjusted 
and maintained since the refractive index varies significantly with temperature.  
 
The Abbe’s refractometer is convenient for most measurements of refractive index but other 
refractometer of equal or greater accuracy may be used. Commercial refractometers are normally constructed for use with white light but are calibrated to give the refractive index in terms of the D line of sodium light.  
 To achieve accuracy, the apparatus should be calibrated against distilled water which has a 
refractive index of 1.3325 at 25
0 or against the reference liquids given in the T able 3.1.  
 
Table 3.1 
_______________________________________________________________________  
 Reference        η
 D20º             Temperature  
Liquid                                Co -efficient    
                                  Δn/Δt  
 Carbon tetrachloride     1.4603   -0.00057 
Toluene      1.4969   -0.00056 
α-Methylnaphthalene     1.6176   -0.00048 
________________________________________________________________________ 
* Reference index value for the D line of sodium, measured at 20
0 
 
The cleanliness of the instrument should be checked frequently by determining the 
refractive index of distilled water, which at 250 is 1.3325. 
 
3.1.2. -  WEIGHT PER MILLILITRE AND SPECIFIC GRAVITY 
     A. Weight per millilitre : The weight per millilitre of a liquid is the weight in g of 1 ml of a 
liquid when weighed in air at 25
0, unless otherwise specified.  
 Method  
   Select a thoroughly clean and dry pycnometer. Calibrat e the pycnometer by filling it with 
recently boiled and cooled w ater at 25
0 and weighing the contents. Assuming that the weight of 1 
ml of water at 250 when weighed in air of density 0.0012 g per ml, is 0.99602 g. Calculate the 
capacity of the pycnometer. (Ordinary deviations in the density of air from the value given do not affect the result of a determination significantly). Adjust the temperature of the substance to be examined, to about 20
0 and fill the pycnometer with it. Adjust the temperature of the filled 
pycnometer to 250, remove any excess of the substance and weigh. Substract the tare weight of the 
pycnometer from the filled weight of the pycnometer. Determine the weight per milliliter dividing  291 the weight in air, expressed in g, of the quantity of  liquid which fills the pycnometer at the specified 
temperature, by the capacity expressed in ml, of the pycnometer at the same temperature.  
 
B. Specific gravity : The specific gravity of a liquid is the weight of a given volume of the liquid at 
250 (unless  otherwise specified) compared with the weight of an equal volume of water at  the same 
temperature,  all weighing being  taken  in air.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Method   
 
Proceed as described under w t. per ml. Obtain the specific gravity of the liquid by dividing 
the weight of the liquid contained in the pycnometer by the weight of water contained, both 
determined at 250 unless otherwise directed in the individual monograph.   
 
3.1.3. -  DETERMINATION OF p H VALUES  
 
The pH value of an aqueous liquid may be defined as the  common logarithum of the 
reciprocal of the hydrogen io n concentration expressed in g per litre. Although this definition 
provides a useful practical means for the quantitative indication of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, it is less satisfactory from a strictly theoretical point of view. No definition of pH as a 
measurable quantity can have a simple meaning, which is also fundamental and exact.  
 
The pH value of a liquid can be determined potentiometrically by means of the glass 
electrode, a reference electrode and a pH meter either of the digital or analogue type.  
 
3.2. -  DETERMINATION OF MELTING RANGE AND CONGEALING RANGE  
 
3.2.1. Determination of Melting Range  
 
The melting -range of a substance is the range between the corrected temperature at whi ch 
the substance begins to form droplets and the corrected temperature at which it completely melts, as shown by formation of a meniscus.  
Apparatus  
 
(a) A capillary tube of soft glass, closed at one end, and having the following dimensions:  
 
(i) thickness of the wall, about 0.10 to 0.15 mm.  
(ii) length about 10 cm or any length suitable for apparatus used.  
(iii) internal diameter 0.9 to 1.1 mm for substances melting below 1000  or 0.8  to 1.2 
mm for substances melting above 1000. 
 Thermometers  
 
Accurately standardized t hermometers covering the range 10
0 to 3000 the length of two 
degrees on the scale being not less than 0.8 mm. These thermometers are of the mercury -in-glass, 
solid -stem type; the bulb is cylindrical in shape, and made of approved thermometric glass suitabl e 
for the range of temperature covered; each thermometer is fitted with a safety chamber. The 
smallest division on the thermometer scale should vary between 0.10 to 1.50 according to the 
melting point of the substance under test.  
 
The following form of hea ting apparatus is recommended.  
  292 A glass heating vessel of suitable, construction and capacity fitted with suitable stiring 
device, capable of rapidly mixing the liquids. 
 Suitable liquids for use in the heating vessel:  
  Glycerin    Upto 150
0 
  Sulphuric ac id to which a small crystal of potassium nitrate  or 4 
 Drops of nitric acid  per 100 ml has been added    Upto 200
0 
  A liquid paraffin of sufficiently high boiling range    Upto 250
0 
  Seasame oil    Upto 300
0 
  30 parts of potassium sulphate , dissolved by he ating in 70  
 parts of sulphuric acid    Upto 300
0 
  Any other apparatus or method, preferably, the electric method may be used subject to a 
check by means of pure substances having melting temperature covering the ranges from 0
0 to 3000 
and with suitable in tervals.  
  The following substances are suitable for this purpose. 
 Substance  Melting range  
 Vanillin  81
0 to 830 
 Acetanilide  1140 to 1160 
 Phenacetin  1340 to 1360 
 Sulphanilamide  1640 to 166.50 
 Sulphapyridine  1910 to 1930 
 Caffeine (Dried at 1000) 2340 to 2370 
 
Procedure  
 
Method I : Transfer a suitable quantity of the powdered and thoroughly dried substance to a dry 
capillary tube and pack the powder by tapping the tube on a hard surface so as to form a tightly packed column of 2 to 4 mm in height. Attach the capillary tube and its contents to a standardized thermometer so that the closed end is at the level of the middle of the bulb; heat in a suitable apparatus (preferably a round- bottom flask) fitted with an auxiliary thermometer regulating the rise 
of temperature in the beginning to 3
0 per minute. When the temperature reached is below the lowest 
figure of the range for the substance under examination, the heating of the apparatus is adjusted as desired; if no other directions are given, the rate of rise of temperature should be kept at 1
0 to 20 per 
minute. The statement ‘determined by rapid heating’ means that the rate of rise of temperature is 50 
per minute during the entire period of heating.  
 Unless otherwise directed, the temperature at which the subs tance forms droplets against the 
side of the tube and the one at which it is completely melted as indicated by the formation of a definite meniscus, are read.  
 The following emergent stem corrections should be applied to the temperature readings.  
  Before starting the determination of the melting temperature the auxiliary thermometer is 
attached so that the bulb touches the standard thermometer at a point midway between the graduation for the expected melting temperature and the surface of the heating mater ial. When the 
substance has melted, the temperature is read on the auxiliary thermometer. The correction figure to  293 be added to the temperature reading of the standardized thermometer is calculated from the 
following formula  
 
0.00015 N (T —t) 
 Where ‘T’ is t he temperature reading of the standardized thermometer.  
 ‘t’ is the temperature reading of the auxiliary thermometer.  
 ‘N’ is the number of degrees of the scale of the standardized thermometer between the surface of the heating material and level of mercur y. 
 The statement “melting range, a
0 to b0” means that the corrected temperature at which the material 
forms droplets must be at least a0, and that the material must be completely melted at the corrected 
temperature, b0. 
 Method II : The apparatus employed for this test is the same as described for method I except for 
such details as are mentioned in the procedure given below  
 
Procedure :  A capillary tube open at both ends is used for this test. Melt the material under test at 
as low a temperature as possibl e. Draw into the capillary a column of the material about 10 mm 
high. Cool the charged tube in contact with ice for at least 2 hours. Attach the tube to the 
thermometer by means of rubber band and adjust it in the heating vessel containing water so that the upper edge of the material is 10 mm below the water level. Heat in the manner as prescribed in 
Method I until the temperature is about 5
0 below the expected melting point and then regulate the 
rate of rise of temperature to between 0.50 to 10 per minute.  The temperature at which the material 
is observed to rise in the capillary tube is the melting temperature of the substance.  
 3.2.2. -  Determination of Congealing Range   
 
The congealing temperature is that point at which there exists a mixture of the liq uid (fused) 
phase of a substance and a small but increasing proportion of the solid phase.  It is distinct from the freezing point which is the temperature at which the liquid and solid phase of a substance are in equilibrium.  In certain cases, this may h appen over a range of temperatures.  
 The temperature at which a substance solidifies upon cooling is a useful index of its purity if heat is liberated when solidification takes place.  
 The following method is applicable to substances that melt between – 20
0 and 1500. 
 
Apparatus  
 
A test -tube (About 150 mm ×  25 mm) placed inside another test -tube (about 160 mm ×  40 mm) the 
inner tube is closed by a stopper that carries a stirrer and a thermometer (About 175 mm long and 
with 0.20 graduations) fixed so that the bulb is about 15 mm above the bottom of the tube.  The 
stirrer is made from a glass rod or other suitable material formed at one end into a loop of about 18 mm overall diameter at right angles to the rod.  The inner tube with its jacket is supported centrally in a 1 -litre baker containing a suitable cooling liquid to within 20 mm of the top.  The thermometer 
is supported in the cooling bath.  
 
 
 
  294 Method  
 
Melt the substance, if a solid, at a temperature not more than 200 above its expected congealing 
point, and pour it into the inner test -tube to a height of 50 to 57 mm.  Assemble the apparatus with 
the bulb of the thermometer immersed half -way between the top and bottom of the sample in the 
test-tube.  Fill the bath to almost 20 mm from the top of the tube with a suitable fluid at a 
temperature 40 to 50 below the expected congealing point.  If the substance is a liquid at room 
temperature, carry out the determination using a bath temperature about 150 below the expected 
congealing point.  When the sample has  cooled to about 50 above its expected congealing point stir 
it continuously by moving the loop up and down between the top and bottom of the sample at a regular rate of 20 complete cycles per minute.  If necessary, congelation may be induced by scratching  the inner walls of the test- tube with the thermometer or by introducing a small amount of 
the previously congealed substance under examination.  Pronounced supercooling may result in deviation from the normal pattern of temperature changes.  If it happens , repeat the test introducing 
small fragments of the solid substance under examination at 1
0 intervals when the temperature 
approaches the expected congealing point.  
 Record the reading of the thermometer every 30 seconds and continue stirring only so long  as the 
temperature is falling.  Stop the stirring when the temperature is constant to starts to rise slightly.  
Continue recording the temperature for at least 3 minutes after the temperature again begins to fall 
after remaining constant.  
 
The congealing point will be mean of not less than four consecutive readings that lie within a range of 0.2
0. 
 
3.2.3. -  DETERMINATION OF BOILING RANGE  
 
The boiling -range of a substance is the range of temperature within which the whole or a 
specified portion of the subst ance distils.  
 Apparatus  
 
 The boiling -range is determined in a suitable apparatus, the salient features of which are 
described below:  
 
(a) Distillation flask : The flask shall be made of colourless transparent heat -resistant glass and 
well annealed. It sho uld have a spherical bulb having a capacity of about 130 ml. The side tube 
slopes downwards in the same plane as the axis of the neck at angle of between 72
0 to 780. Other 
important dimensional details are as under:  
   Internal diameter of neck   15 to 17 m m 
  
  Distance from top of neck to center of side tube   72 to 78 mm  
   Distance from the center of the side tube to surface  
  of the Liquid when the flask contains 100 ml liquid 87 to 93 mm  
   Internal diameter of side tube   3.5 to 4.5 mm  
   Length of sid e tube   97 to 103 mm  
 (b) Thermometer: Standardised thermometers calibrated for 100 mm immersion and suitable for 
the purpose and covering the boiling range of the substance under examination shall be employed;  295 the smallest division on the thermometer scal e may vary between 0.20 to 10 according to 
requirement.  
 
(c)  Draught Screen : suitable draught screen, rectangular in cross section with a hard asbestos 
board about 6 mm thick closely fitting horizontally to the sides of the screen, should be used. The asbestos board shall have a centrally cut circular hole, 110 mm in diameter. The asbestos board is 
meant for ensuring that hot gases from the heat source do not come in contact with the sides or neck of the flask.  
 (d) Asbestos Board : A 150 mm square asbestos  board 6 mm thick provided with a circular hole 
located centrally to hold the bottom of the flask, shall be used. For distillation of liquids boiling below 60
0 the hole shall be 30 mm in diameter; for other liquid it should be 50 mm in diameter. 
This board is to be placed on the hard asbestos board of the draught screen covering its 110 mm 
hole. 
 
(e)  Condenser : A straight water -cooled glass condenser about 50 cm long shall be used.  
 
Procedure : 100 ml of the liquid to be examined is placed in the distillation flask, and a few glass 
beads or other suitable substance is added. The bulb of the flask is placed centrally over a circular hole varying from 3 to 5 cm in diameter (according to the boiling range of the substance under examination), in a suitable asbes tos board. The thermometer is held concentrically in the neck of 
the flask by means of a well fitting cork in such a manner that the bulb of the thermometer remains just below the level of the opening of the side -tube. Heat the flask slowly in the beginning and 
when distillation starts, adjust heating in such a manner that the liquid distils at a constant rate of 4 to 5 ml per minute. The temperature is read when the first drop runs from the condenser, and again when the last quantity of liquid in the flask is evaporated.  
 
The boiling ranges indicated, apply at a barometric pressure of 760 mm of mercury. If the 
determination is made at some other barometric pressure, the following correction is added to the temperatures read:  
 
K- (760—p)  
 
Where p is the barometric pressure (in mm) read on a mercury barometer, without taking 
into account the temperature of the air;  
 
K is the boiling temperature constant for different liquids having different boiling ranges as 
indicated below: — 
  Observed Boiling range  ‘K’ 
  Below 100
0 0.04 
 1000 to 1400 0.045 
 1410 to 1900 0.05 
 1910 to 2400 0.055 
 above 2400 0.06 
 
If the barometric pressure is below 760 mm of mercury the correction is added to the 
observed boiling- range; if above, the correction is subtracted.  
The statement ‘d istils between a0 and b0, , means that temperature at which the first drop 
runs from the condenser is not less than a0 and that the temperature at which the liquid is 
completely evaporated is not greater than b0.  296  
Micro -methods of equal accuracy may be used.  
 3.3. -  DETERMINATION OF OPTICAL ROTATION AND SPECIFIC OPTICAL 
ROTATION  
A. Optical Rotation : Certain substances, in a pure state, in solution and in tinctures posses the 
property of rotating the plane of polarized light, i.e., the incident light emerge s in a plane forming 
an angle with the plane of the incident light. These substances are said to be optically active and the 
property of rotating the plane of polarized light is known as optical r otation. The optical rotation is 
defined as the angle throug h which the plane of polarized light is rotated when polarized light 
obtained from sodium or mercury vapour lamp passes through one decimeter thick layer of a liquid or a solution of a substance at a temperature of 25
0 unless as otherwise stated in the mon ograph. 
Substances are described as dextrorotatory or laevoretatory according to the clockwise or anticlockwise rotation respectively of the plane of polarized light. Dextrorotation is designated by a plus (+) sign and laevorotation by a minus ( -) sign bef ore the number indicating the degrees of 
rotation.  Apparatus : A polarimeter on which angular rotation accurate 0.05
0 can be read may be used.  
 Calibration: The apparatus may be checked by using a solution of previously dried sucrose  and 
measuring the opti cal rotation in a 2 -din tube at 25
0 and using the concentrations indicated in Table.  
 
 Concentration  Angle of Rotation (+)  
 (g/100 ml)   at 250 
 
  10.0   13.33 
 20.0   26.61  
 30.0   39.86 
 40.0   53.06 
 50.0   66.23  
 Procedure: For liquid substances, ta ke a minimum of five readings of the rotation of the liquid and 
also for an empty tube at the specified temperature. For a solid dissolve in a suitable solvent and take five readings of the rotation of the solution and the solvent used. Calculate the avera ge of each 
set of five readings and find out the corrected optical rotation from the observed rotation and the reading with the blank (average).  
 B. Specific Rotation  : The apparatus and the procedure for this determination are the same as those specified for optical rotation.  
   Specific rotation is denoted by the expression 
          t  
   [α]— 
          x 
 ‘t’ denotes the temperature of rotation; ‘ α’ denotes the wave length of light used or the 
characteristic spectral line. Specific rotations are expressed in terms of sodium light of wave length 589.3 mw (D line) and at a temperature of 25
0, unless otherwise specified.  
 Specific rotation of a substance may be calculated from the following formulae:  For liquid substances  
  297     
                                                           a   
  [α]t= ------  
            ld  
 For solutions of substances  
 
                         a x 100   
 [α]t =     -------------  
                     lc.  
  Where a is the corrected observed rotation in degrees  
  1 is the length of the polarimeter tube in decimeter s. 
 
D is the specific gravity of the liquid C is the concentration of solution expressed as the number of g of the substance in 100 ml of solution.  
 
3.4. -  DETERMINATION OF VISCOSITY 
 
 Viscosity is a property of a liquid, which is closely related to the re sistance to flow.  
 
 In C.G.S. system, the dynamic viscosity (n) of a liquid is the tangential force in dryness per 
square centimeter exerted in either of the two parallel planes placed, 1 cm apart when the space between them is filled with the fluid and on e of the plane is moving in its own plane with a velocity 
of 1 cm per second relatively to the other. The unit of dynamic viscosity is the poise (abbreviated 
p). The centi poise (abbreviated cp) is 1/100 th of one poise.  
 
 While on the absolute scale, viscosity is measured in poise or centi poise, it is mot 
convenient to use the kinematic scale in which the units are stokes (abbreviated S) and centi -stokes 
(abbreviated CS). The centistokes is 1/100 th of one stoke. The kinematic viscosity of a liquid is 
equal  to the quotient of the dynamic viscosity and the density of the liquid at the same temperature, 
thus :  
            Dynamic Viscosity  
 Kinematic Viscosity =     -------------------------  
                  Density  
  Viscosity of liquid may be determined by any method that will measure the resistance to 
shear offered by the liquid.   Absolute viscosity can be measured directly if accurate dimensions of the measuring 
instruments are known but it is more common practice to calibrate the instrument with a liquid  of 
known viscosity and to determine the viscosity of the unknown fluid by comparison with that of the known.  Procedure: The liquid under test is filled in a U tube viscometer in accordance with the expected 
viscosity of the liquid so that the fluid level  stands within 0.2 mm of the filling mark of the 
viscometer when the capillary is vertical and the specified temperature is attained by the test liquid. The liquid is sucked or blown to the specified weight of the viscometer and the time taken for the meni scus to pass the two specified marks is measured. The kinematic viscosity in centistokes is 
calculated from the following equation: 
 
 Kinematic viscosity = kt 
  298  Where k = the constant of the viscometer tube determined by observation on liqui ds of 
known kinematic viscosity; t = time in seconds for meniscus to pass through the two specified 
marks.  
 
3.5. -  DETERMINATION OF TOTAL SOLIDS  
 
Determination of total solids in Asava/ Aristha is generally required. Asava/ Aristha 
containing sugar or honey should be exa mined by method 1, sugar or honey free Asava/ Aristha 
and other material should be examined by method 2. 
 Method 1 : Transfer accurately 50 ml of the clear Asava/ Aristha an evaporable dish and evaporate 
to a thick extract on a water bath. Unless specified otherwise, extract the residue with 4 quantities, each of 10 ml, of dehydrated ethanol with stirring and filter. Combine the filtrates to another evaporating dish which have been dried to a constant weight and evaporate nearly to dryness on a water bath, add accurately 1 g of diatomite (dry at 105
0 for 3 hours and cooled in a desiccator for 30 
min), stir thoroughly, dry at 1050 for 3 hours, cool the dish in a desiccator for 30 min, and weigh 
immediately. Deduct the weight of diatomite added, the weight of r esidue should comply with the 
requirements stated under the individual monograph.  
 
Method 2 : Transfer accurately 50 ml of the clear Asava/ Aristha to an evaporable dish, which has 
been dried to a constant weight and evaporate to dryness on a water bath, t hen dry at 1050 for 3 
hours. After cooling the dish containing the residue in a desiccator for 30 min, weigh it 
immediately. The weight of residue should comply with the requirements stated under the individual monograph.  
 
3.6. -  SOLUBILITY IN WATER  
 
Take 100 ml of distil water in a Nessler cylinder  and add air -dried and coarsely powdered 
drug up to saturation. Then stir the sample continuously by twirling the spatula (rounded end of a 
microspatula) rapidly. After 1 minute, filter the solution using Hirsch funnel, evaporate the filtrate to dryness in a tared flat bottomed shallow dish and dry at 105
0 to constant weight and calculate the 
solubility of the drug in water (wt. in mg/100ml).  
 
3.7. -  DETERMINATION OF SAPONIFICATION VALUE  
 
The saponification value is the number of mg of potassium hydroxide required to neutralize 
the fatty acids, resulting from the complete hydrolysis of 1 g of the oil or fat, when deter mined by 
the following method:  
Dissolve 35 to 40 g of potassium hydroxide in 20 ml water, and add sufficient alcohol to 
make 1,000 ml. Allow it to stand overnight, and pour off the clear liquor.  
Weigh accurately about 2 g of the substance in a tared 250 ml flask, add 25 ml of the 
alcoholic solution of potassium hydroxide, attach a reflux condenser and boil on a water -bath for 
one hour, frequently rotating the contents of the flask cool and add 1 ml of solution of phenolphthalein and titrate the excess of alkali with 0.5 N hydrochloric acid. Note the number of ml required (a). Repeat the experiment with the same quantities of the same reagents in the manner 
omitting the substance. Note the number of ml required (b) Calculate the saponification value from the following formula:— 
 
            (b –a) × 0.02805 × 1.000 
 Saponification Value   = ------------------------------------  
                  W  
 
 Where ‘W’ is the weight in g of the substance taken.   299  
3.8. -  DETERMINATION OF IODINE VALUE  
 
The Iodine value of a substance is the weight of iodine absorbed by 100 part by weight of 
the substance, when determined by one of the following methods: - 
  
Iodine Flasks  - The Iodine flasks have a nominal capacity of 250 ml.  
 
A. Iodine Monochloride Method  - Place the substance accurately weighed, in dry iodine flask, 
add 10 ml of carbon tetrachloride , and dissolve. Add 20 ml of iodine monochloride solution, insert 
the stopper, previously moistened with solution of potassium iodine and allow to stand in a dark place at a temperature of about 17
0 or thirty minutes. Add 15 ml of solution of potassium iodine and 
100 ml water; s hake, and titrate with 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate, using solution of starch as 
indicator. Note the number of ml required (a). At the same time carry out the operation in exactly the same manner, but without the substance being tested, and note the number of  ml of 0.1 N 
sodium thiosulphate required (b).  
  Calculate the iodine value from the formula:-  
          (b –a) × 0.01269 × 100 
 Iodine value = -------------------------------------  
                W  
 Where ‘W’ is the weight in g of the substance taken.  
 
The approximate weight, in g, of the substance to be taken may be calculated by dividing 20 
by the highest expected iodine value. If more than half the available halogen is absorbed, the test must be repeated, a smaller quantity of the substance being used.  
 
Iodine Monochloride Solution: The solution may be prepared by either of the two following 
methods:  
 (1) Dissolve 13 g of iodine in a mixture of 300 ml of carbon tetrachloride and 700 ml of glacial 
acetic acid. To 20 ml of this solution, add 15 ml of solut ion of potassium iodide and 100 ml of 
water , and titrate the solution with 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate . Pass chlorine, washed and dried, 
through the remainder of the iodine solution until the amount of 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate required for the titration is approximately, but more than, doubled.  (2)  Iodine t richloride  8 g 
 Iodine  9 g 
 Carbon t etrachloride  300 ml  
 Glacial a cetic a cid, sufficient to produce  1000 ml  
 
Dissolve the iodine trichloride in about 200 ml of glacial acetic acid, dissolve the iodine in 
the carbon tetrachloride, mix the two solutions, and add sufficient glacial  acetic acid to produce 
1000 ml. Iodine Monochloride Solution should be kept in a stoppered bottle, protected from light 
and stored in a cool place. 
 
B. Pyridine Bromide Method  - Place the substance, accurately weighed, in a dry iodine flask, add 
10 ml of carbon tetrachloride and dissolve. Add 25 ml of pyridine bromide solution, allow to stand for ten minutes in a dark place and complete the determination described under iodine 
monochloride method, beginning with the words. Add 15 ml. 
  300 The approximate weight in gram, of the substance to be taken may be calculated by dividing 
12.5 by the highest expected iodine value. If more than half the available halogen is absorbed the 
test must b e repeated, a small quantity of the substance being used.  
 
Pyridine bromide Solution: Dissolve 8 g pyridine and 10 g of sulphuric acid in 20 ml of 
glacial acetic acid , keeping the mixture cool. Add 8 g of bromine  dissolved in 20 ml of glacial 
acetic acid  and dilute to 100 ml with glacial acetic acid . 
 
Pyridine bromide Solution should be freshly prepared.  
 
3.9. -  DETERMINATION OF ACID VALUE  
 
The acid value is the number of mg of potassium hydroxide required to neutralize the free 
acids in 1 g of the substanc e, when det ermined by the following method:  
 Weigh accurately about 10 g of the substance (1 to 5) in the case of a resin into a 250 ml 
flask and add 50 ml of a mixture of equal volumes of alcohol and solvent ether, which has been neutralized after the add ition of 1 ml of solution of phenolphthalein. Heat gently on a water -bath, if 
necessary until the substance has completely melted, titrate with 0.1 N potassium hydroxide , 
shaking constantly until a pink colour which persists for fifteen seconds is obtained. Note the number of ml required. Calculate the acid value from the following formula:  
 
   a × 0.00561 × 1000  
 Acid Value =  --------------------------------  
    W 
 
Where ‘a’ is the number of ml of 0.1 N potassium hydroxide required and ‘ W’ is the weight 
in g of the substance taken. 
 
3.10. -  DETERMINATION OF PEROXIDE VALUE  
 
The peroxide value is the number of milliequivalents of active oxygen that expresses the 
amount of peroxide contained in 1000 g of the substance.  
 Method  
 
Unless otherwise specified in t he individual monograph, weigh 5 g of the substance being 
examined, accurately weighed, into a 250 -ml glass -stoppered conical flask, add 30 ml of a mixture 
of 3 volumes of glacial acetic acid and 2 volumes of chloroform, swirl until dissolved and add 
0.5ml  volumes of saturated potassium iodide solut ion. Allow to stand for exactly 1 minute, with 
occasional shaking, add 30 ml of water  and titrate gradually, with continuous and vigorous shaking, 
with 0.01M sodium thiosulphate until the yellow colour almost dis appears. Add 0.5 ml of starch 
solution and continue the titration, shaking vigorously until the blue colour just disappears (a ml). 
Repeat the operation omitting the substance being examined (b ml). The volume of 0.01M sodium 
thiosulphate in the blank dete rmination must not exceed 0.1 ml. 
 
Calculate the peroxide value from the expression  
   Peroxide value = 10 (a – b)/W 
 
Where W = weight, in g, of the substance.  
 
  301 3.11. -  DETERMINATION OF UNSAPONIFIABLE MATTER  
 
The unsaponifiable matter consists of substanc es present in oils and fats, which are not 
saponifiable by alkali hydroxides and are determined by extraction with an organic solvent of a 
solution of the saponified substance being examined.  
Method  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the individual monograph, introduce about 5 g of the 
substance being examined, accurately weighed, into a 250 -ml flask fitted with a reflux condenser. 
Add a solution of 2 g of potassium hydroxide in 40 ml of ethanol (95per cent)  and heat on a water -
bath for 1 hour, shaking frequently. Transfer the contents of the flask to a separating funnel with the 
aid of 100 ml of hot water and, while the liquid is still warm, shake very carefully with three quantities, each of 100 ml, of peroxide -free ether. Combine the ether extracts in a seco nd separating 
funnel containing 40 ml of water, swirl gently for a few minute, allow to separate and reject the lower layer. Wash the ether extract with two quantities, each of 40 ml, of water and with three quantities, each of 40 ml, of a 3  per cent w/v s olution of potassium hydroxide, each treatment being 
followed by a washing with 40 ml of water. Finally, wash the ether layer with successive quantities, each of 40 ml, of water until the aqueous layer is not alkaline to phenolphthalein solution. Transfer 
the ether layer to a weighed flask, washing out the separating funnel with peroxide- free ether.  Distil 
off the ether and add to the residue 6 ml of acetone. Remove the solvent completely from the flask 
with the aid of a gentle current of air. Dry at 100
0 to 1050 for 30 minutes. Cool in a desiccator and 
weigh the residue. Calculate the unsaponifiable matter as per cent w/w.  
 
Dissolve the residue in 20 ml of ethanol (95per cent) , previously neutralised to phenolphthalein 
solution and titrate with 0.1M ethanol ic potassium hydroxide. If the volume of 0.1M ethanolic 
potassium hydroxide exceeds 0.2 ml, the amount weighed cannot be taken as the unsaponifiable matter and the test must be repeated.  
 3.12. -  DETECTION OF MINERAL OIL (HOLDE’S TEST)  
 
Take 22  ml of the a lcoholic potassium hydroxide solution in a conical flask and add 1ml of 
the sample of the oil to be tested. Boil in a water bath using an air or water cooled condenser till the 
solution becomes clear and no oily drops are found on the sides of the flask. T ake out the flask 
from the water bath, transfer the contents to a wide mouthed warm test tube and carefully add 25ml of boiling distilled water along the side of the test tube. Continue shaking the tube lightly from side to side during the addition. The turbidity indicates presence of mineral oil, the depth of turbidity depends on the percentage of mineral oil present.  
 
3.13. -  RANCIDITY TEST  (KREIS TEST)   
 
The test depends upon the formation of a red colour when oxidized fat is treated with conc. 
hydrochloric acid  and a solution of phloroglucinol in ether. The compound in rancid fats 
responsible for the colour reaction is epihydrin aldehyde. All oxidized fats respond to the Kreis test and the intensity of the colour produced is roughly proportional to the degree of oxidative rancidity.  
 
Procedure  
 
Mix 1 ml of melted fat and 1 ml of conc. hydrochloric acid in a test tube. Add 1 ml of a 1 
per cent solution of phloroglucinol in diethyl ether  and mix thoroughly with the fat -acid mixture. A 
pink colour formation indicates that the fat is slightly oxidized while a red colour indicates that the fat is definitely oxidized.  
  302 3.14. Determination of Reichert -Meissl and Polenske Value  
 
The Reichert -Meissl value is the number of millitres of 0.1N aqueous sodium hydroxide solution 
required to neutralize steam volatile water soluble fatty acids distilled from 5g of an oil/fat under the prescribed conditions. It is a measure of water soluble steam volatile fatty acids chiefly butric and caprole acids present in oil or fat. 
The Polenske value is the number of millitres of 0.1N aqueous alkali solution required to 
neutralize steam volatile water insoluble fatty acids distilled from 5 g of the oil/fat under the prescribed conditions. It is a measure of the steam volatile and water  insoluble fatty acids, chiefly 
caprylic, capric and lauric acids present in oil and fat.  
 
Principle:  
 
The material is saponified by heating with glycerol sodium hydroxide solution and then split by 
treatment with dilute sulfuric acid. The volatile acids a re immediately steam distilled. The soluble 
volatile acids in the distillate are filtered out and estimated by titration with standard sodium hydroxide solution.  
Reagents  
 
a. Glycerine: Analytical reagent grade  
b. Concentrated sodium hydroxide solution: 50 percent (w/w)  
c. Pumice stone grains  
d. Dilute sulfuric acid solution: Approximately 1.0 N  
e. Sodium hydroxide solution: 0.1N solution in water, accurately standardized  
f. Phenolphthalein indicator: Dissolve 0.1g of phenolphthalein in 100 ml of ethyl  alcohol  
g. Ethyl alcohol : 90% by volume and neutral to phenolphthalein 
 
Procedure  
 
Weigh accurately 5 ± 0.1 g of filtered oil or fat sample into a clean, dry, 300 ml distilling 
flask. Add 20 g of glycerine and 2 ml of concentrated sodium hydroxide solution, and heat with 
swirling over a flame until completely saponified, as shown by the mixture becoming perfectly clear. Cool the content slightly and add 90 ml of boiling distilled water, which has been vigorously boiled for about 15 min. After thorough mixing the solution should remain clear. If the solution is not clear (indicating incomplete saponification) or is darker than light yellow (indicating over -
heating), repeat the saponification with a fresh sample of the oil or fat. If the sample is old , the solution may some times be dark and not clear.  
 
Add about 0.1 g of pumic stone grains, and 50 ml of dilute sulfuric acid solution. 
Immediately connect the flask to the distillation apparatus. Heat very gently until the liberated fatty acids melt and separate. Then set the flame so that 110 ml of distillate shall be collected within 19 
to 21 min. The beginning of the distillation is to be taken as the moment when the first drop forms in the still head. Collect the distallate in a graduated flask. The temperature  of the issuing distillate 
should be between 18
0 to 210.  
 When the distillate exactly reaches the 110 ml mark on the flask, remove the flame and 
quickly replace the flask by a 25 ml measuring cylinder. Stopper the graduated flask and without mixing place it in a water bath maintain at 15
0 for 10 min so that the 110 ml graduation mark is 1 
cm below the water level in the bath. Remove the graduated flask from the cold water bath, dry the outside and mix the content gently by inverting the flask 4 or 5 times without shaking. Avoid wetting the stopper with the insoluble acids. Filter the liquid through a dry, 9 cm Whatman No.4 
filter paper. The filtrate should be clear. Pipette 100 ml of the filtrate and add 5 drops of the  303 phenolophthalein solution, and titrate  against standard 0.1 N sodium hydroxide solution. Run a 
Blank Test without the fat, but using the same quantities of the reagents.  
 
Calculation  
 
Reichert -Meissl Value = (A -B) x N x 11  
where,  
 A = Volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution required for the test;  
B = Volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution required for the blank;  
N = Normality of standard sodium hydroxide solution.  
After titrating the soluble volatile acids, detach the still head and rinse the condenser with 
three success ive 15 ml portions of cold distilled water passing each washing separately through the 
measuring cylinder, 110 ml graduated flask and the filter paper and allow all of it to pass through. Discard all the washings. Place the funnel on a clean conical flask.  Dissolve the insoluble fatty 
acids by three similar washings of the condenser, the measuring cylinder, the 110 ml flask with stopper, and the filter paper with 15 ml portions of ethyl alcohol. Combine the alcoholic washings in a clean flask, add 5 drops of phenolphthalein indicator solution, and titrate with standard (0.1N) sodium hydroxide solution.  Polenske Value = 10 x V x N  
where,  
 V = Volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution required for the test;  
N = Normality of the standard sodium hydrox ide solution.  
 
3.15. -  DETERMINATION OF ALCOHOL CONTENT  
 
The ethanol content of a liquid is expressed as the number of volumes of ethanol contained 
in 100 volumes of the liquid, the volumes being measured at 24.9
0 to 25.10. This is known as the 
“percentage  of ethanol by volume”. The content may also be expressed in g  of ethanol per 100 g of 
the liquid. This is known as the ‘percentage of ethanol by weight”.  
 
Use Method I or Method II, as appropriate, unless otherwise specified in the individual 
monograph.  
 
Method I  
 
Carry out the  method for gas chromatography , using the following solutions. Solution (1) 
contains 5.0 per cent v/v of ethanol and 5.0 per cent v/v of 1- propanol (internal standard). For 
solution (2) dilute a volume of the preparation being examined with water to contain between 4.0 and 6.0 per cent v/v of ethanol. Prepare solution (3) in the same manner as solution (2) but adding 
sufficient of the internal standard to produce a final concentration of 5.0 per cent v/v.  
 
The chromatographic procedur e may be carried out using a column (1.5 m x 4 mm) packed 
with porous polymer beads (100 to 120 mesh) and maintained at 150
0, with both the inlet port and 
the detector at 1700, and nitrogen as the carrier gas.  
 Calculate the percentage content of ethanol from the areas of the peaks due to ethanol in the 
chromatogram obtained with solutions (1) and (3). 
 
  304 Method II  
 
For preparations where the use of Industrial Methylated Spirit is permitted in the 
monograph, determine the content of ethanol as described in Method I but using as solution (2) a 
volume of the preparation being examined diluted with water to contain between 4.0 and 6.0 per 
cent v/v of total ethanol and methanol.  
Determine the concentration of methanol in the following manner. Carry out the 
chromatographic procedure described under Method I but using the following solutions. Solution 
(1) contains 0.25  per cent v/v of methanol and 0.25 per cent v/v of 1- propanol (internal standard). 
For solution (2) dilute a volume of the preparation being examine d with water to contain between 
0.2 per cent and 0.3 per cent v/v of methanol. Prepare solution (3) in the same manner as solution 
(2) but adding sufficient of the internal standard to produce a final concentration of 0.25  per cent 
v/v.  
The sum of the contents of ethanol and methanol is within the range specified in the 
individual monograph and the ration of the content of methanol to that of ethanol is commensurate with Industrial Methylated Spirit having been used.  
Method III  
 
This method is intended only for certain liquid preparations containing ethanol. Where the 
preparation contains dissolved substances that may distil along with ethanol Method III  B or III  C 
must be followed. 
 
Apparatus  
 
The apparatus (see Fig. 3) consists of a round- bottomed flask  (A) fitted with a distillation 
head (B) with a steam trap and attached to a vertical condenser (C). A tube is fitted to the lower part of the condenser and carries the distillate into the lower part of a 100- ml or 250- ml volumetric flask 
(D). The volumetr ic flask is immersed in a beaker (E) containing a mixture of ice and water during 
the distillation. A disc with a circular aperture, 6 cm in diameter, is placed under the distillation flask (A) to reduce the risk of charring of any dissolved substances.  
 
Method III A  
 
Transfer 25 ml of the preparation being examined, accurately measured at 24.9
0 to 25.10, to 
the distillation flask. Dilute with 150 ml of water and add a little pumice powder. Attach the 
distillation head and condenser. Distil and collect not less than 90 ml of the distillate into a 100 -ml 
volumetric flask. Adjust the temperature to 24.90 to 25.10 and dilute to volume with distilled water 
at 24.90 to 25.10. Determine the relative density at 24.90 to 25.10. The values indicated in column 2 
of Ta ble 3.2  are multiplied by 4 in order to obtain the percentage of ethanol by volume contained 
in the preparation. If the specific gravity is found to be between two values, the percentage of ethanol should be obtained by interpolation. After calculation of  the ethanol content, report the 
result to one decimal place.  
 NOTE – (1) If excessive frothing is encountered during distillation, render the solution strongly 
acid with phosphoric acid or treat with a small amount of liquid paraffin or silicone  oil.  
 (2) The distillate should be clear or not more than slightly cloudy. If it is turbid or contains oily 
drops, follow Method IIIC. When steam -volatile acids are present, make the solution just alkaline 
with 1M sodium hydroxide using solid phenolphthalein as in dicator before distillation.  
  305 Method III  B 
 
Follow this method or the following one if the preparation being examined contains 
appreciable proportions of volatile materials other than ethanol and water.  
 
Mix 25 ml of the prepara tion, accurately measured at  240 to 25.10, with about 100 ml of water in a 
separating funnel. Saturate this mixture with sodium chloride, add about 100 ml of hexane and 
shake vigorously for 2 to 3 minutes. Allow the mixture to stand for 15 to 20 minutes. Run the lower 
layer into the distillation flask, wash the hexane layer in the separating funnel by shaking 
vigorously with about 25 ml of sodium chloride  solution, allow to separate and run the wash liquor 
into the first saline solution. Make the mixed solutions just alkaline with 1M sodium hydroxide using solid phenolphthalein as indicator, add a little pumice powder and 100 ml  of water, distil 90 
ml and determine the percentage v/v of   ethanol by Method IIIA beginning at the words “Adjust the  
temperature…”.  
   
 
      
  
  
Fig.3. Apparatus for Determination of Ethanol by Distillation Method.  
      
 
   306 Table 3.2 
 
Specific gravity at 250 Ethanol content * 
1.0000  
0.9985 
0.9970 0.9956 0.9941 0.9927 0.9914 0.9901 0.9888 0.9875 0.9862 0.9850 0.9838 0.9826 0.9814 0.9802 0.9790 0.9778 0.9767 0.9756 0.9744 0.9733 0.9721 0.9710 0.9698 
0.9685  0 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 
25 
 
* per cent v/v at 15.560. 
 
Method III  C 
 
Transfer 25 ml of the preparation, accurately measured at 24.90 to 25.10, to the distillation 
flask. Dilute with 150 ml of water and add a little pumice powder. Attach the distillation head and 
condenser. Distil and collect about 100 ml. Transfer to a separating funnel and determine the percentage v/v of ethanol by Method III  B beginning at the words “Saturate this mixture…”. 
 
 
 
 
    307 APPENDIX –4  
   
4.1. REAGENTS AND SOLUTIONS  
   
Acetate buffer 5.5 pH  – Dissolve 21.5 g of sodium acetate  (AR) in 300 ml purified water  
containing 2 ml glacial acetic acid  and dilute to 1000 ml  
 
Acetic A cid –Contains approximately 33 per cent w/v of C 2H4O2. Dilute 315 ml of glacial acetic 
acid to 1000 ml with water . 
 
Acetic Acid, Glacial – CH 3COOH =60.05. 
 
Contains not less than 99.0 per cent w/w of C 2H4O2. About 17.5 N in strength.  
 
Description   –At temp erature above its freezing point a clear colourless liquid, odour, pungent and 
characteristic; crystallises when cooled to about 100 and does not com pletely re- melt until warmed 
to about 150. 
 
Solubility  – Miscible with water, with glycerin and most fixed and volatile oils.  
 
Boiling range  –Between 1170 and 1190. 
 
Congealing temperature  –Not lower than 14.80. 
 
Wt. per ml  –At 250about 1.047 g.  
 
Heavy metals  –Evaporate 5 ml to dryness in a porcelain dish on water -bath, warm the residue with 
2 ml of 0.1 N hydrochloric acid  and water to make 25 ml; the limit of heavy metals is 10 parts per 
million, Appendix 2.3.3.  
 
Chloride  –5 ml complies with the limit test for chlorides, Appendix 2.3.2. 
 Sulphate  –5 ml complies with the limit test for sulphates,  
 Certain aldeh ydic substances  –To 5 ml add 10 ml of mercuric chloride solution and make 
alkaline with sodium hydroxide solution, allow to stand for five minutes and acidify with dilute sulphuric  acid ; the solution does not show more than a faint turbidity.  
 Formic acid and oxidisable impurities  –Dilute 5 ml with 10 ml of water, to 5 ml of this solution 
add 2.0 ml of 0.1 N potassium dichromate and 6 ml of sulphuric acid, and allow to stand for one 
minute, add 25 ml of water, cool to 15
0, and add 1 ml of freshly prepared potassium iodide solution 
and titrate the liberated iodine with 0.1  N sodium thiosulphate, using starch solution as indicator. 
Not less than 1 ml of 0.N sodium thiosulphate is r equired.   
 
Odorous impurities  –Neutralise 1.5 ml with sodium hydroxide solution; the solution has no odour 
other than a faint acetous odour. 
 
Readily oxidisable impurities  –To 5 ml of the solution prepared for the test for Formic Acid and 
Oxidisable Impurities, add 20 ml of water and 0.5 ml of 0.1 N potassium permanganate;  the pink 
colour does not entirely disappear within half a minute. 
 Non-volatile matter  –Leaves not more than 0.01 per cent w/w of residue when evaporated to 
dryness and dried to constant weight at 105
0.  308  
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 1 g into a stoppered flask conta ining 50 ml of water  and titrate with 
N sodium hydroxide, using phenolphthalein solution as indicator. Each ml of sodium hydroxide is equivalent to 0.06005 g of C
2H4O2. 
 
Acetic Acid, Lead -Free  –Acetic acid which complies with following additional test, boil 25 ml 
until the volume is reduced to about 15 ml, cool make alkaline with lead -free ammonia solution, 
add 1 ml of lead free potassium cyanide solution, dilute  to 50 ml with water, add 2 drops of sodium 
sulphide solution; no darke ning is produced.  
 
Aceton e – Propan -2-one; (CH 3)2CO = 58.08 
 
Description  –Clear, colourless, mobile and volatile liquid; taste, pungent and sweetish; odour characteristic; flammable.  
 
Solubility  –Miscible with water , with alcohol, with solvent ether, and with chloroform, forming 
clear solutions. 
 
Distillation range  –Not less than 96.0 per cent distils between 55.5
0 and 570. 
 Acidity  –10 ml diluted with 10 ml of freshly boiled and cooled water; does not require for 
neutralisation more than 0.2 ml of 0.1  N sodium hydroxide , using phenolphthalein solution as 
indicator.  Alkalinty  –10 ml diluted with 10 ml of freshly boiled and cooled water, is not alkaline to litmus 
solution.  
 
Methyl alcohol  –Dilute 10 ml with water to 100 ml. To 1 ml of the solution add 1 ml of water and 
2 ml of pot assium permanganate and phosphoric acid solution. Allow to stand for ten minutes and 
add 2 ml of oxalic acid and sulphuric acid solution;  to the colourless solution add 5 ml of 
decolorised magenta solution and set aside for thirty mi nutes between 15
0 and 300; no colour is 
produced.   
 Oxidisable substances  –To 20 ml add 0.1 ml of 0.1 N potassium permanganate, and allow to stand 
for fi fteen minutes; the solution is not completely decolorised.  
 Water  –Shake 10 ml with 40 ml of carbon disulphide ; a clear solut ion is produced.  
 Non-volatile matter  –When evaporated on a water -bath and dried to constant weight at 105
0, 
leaves not more than 0.01 per cent w/v residue.  
 Acetone Solution, Standard – A 0.05 per cent v/v solution of acetone in water.  
 Alcohol – 
 
Descrip tion  –Clear, colourless, mobile, volatile liquid, odour, characteristic and spirituous; taste, 
burning, readily volatilised even at low temperature, and boils at about 78
0, flammable. Alcohol 
containing not less than 94.85 per cent v/v and not more than 95.2 per cent v/v of C 2H5OH at 
15.560. 
 Solubility –Miscible in all proportions with water, with chloroform and with solvent ether.  
  309 Acidity or alkalinity  –To 20 ml add five drops of phenolphthalein solution; the solution remains 
colourless and requires not  more than 2.0 ml of 0.1N sodium hydroxide to produce a pink colour.  
 
Specific gravity  –Between 0.8084 and 0.8104 at 250. 
 
Clarity of solution  –Dilute 5 ml to 100 ml with water in glass cylinder; the solution remains clear 
when exam ined against a black background. Cool to 100 for thirty minutes; the solution remains 
clear.  
 
Methanol  –To one drop add one of water, one drop of dilute phosphoric acid, and one drop of 
potassium permanganate solution. Mix, allow to stand for one minute and add sodium bisulphite 
solution dropwise, until the permanganate colour is discharged. If a brown colour remains, add one drop of dilute phosphoric acid. To the colourless solution add 5 ml of freshly prepared chromotropic acid solution and heat on a water -bath at 60
0 for ten mi nutes; no violet colour is 
produced.  
 
Foreign organic substances  –Clean a glass -stoppered cylinder thoroughly with hydrochloric acid, 
rinse with water and finally rinse with the alcohol under examination. Put 20 ml in the cylinder, cool to about 15
0 and th en add from a carefully cleaned pipette 0.1 ml 0.1  N potassium 
permanganate. Mix at once by inverting the stoppered cylinder and allow to stand at 150 for five 
minutes; the pink colour does not entirely disappear.  
 
Isopropyl alcohol and t -butyl alcohol  –To 1 ml add 2 ml of water and 10 ml of mercuric sulphate 
solution and heat in a boiling water -bath; no precipitate is formed within three minutes.  
 
Aldehydes and ketones  –Heat 100 ml of hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution in a loosely 
stoppered flask on a w ater-bath for thirty minutes, cool, and if necessary, add sufficient 0.05 N 
sodium hydroxide  to restore the green colour. To 50 ml of this solution add 25 ml of the alcohol and 
heat on a water bath for ten mi nutes in a loosely stoppered flask. Cool, transf er to a Nesseler 
cylinder , and titrate with 0.05 N sodium hy droxide until the colour matches that of the remainder of 
the hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution co ntained in a similar cylinder, both solutions being 
viewed down the axis of the cylinder. Not m ore than 0.9 ml of 0.05 N sodium hydroxide is r equired.  
  
Fusel oil constituents  –Mix 10 ml with 5 ml of water and 1 ml of  glycerin and allow the mixture to 
evaporate spontaneously from clean, odourless absorbent paper; no foreign odour is perceptible at 
any stage of the evaporation. 
 
Non-volatile matter  –Evaporate 40 ml in a tared dish on a water -bath and dry the residue at 105º 
for one hour; the weight of the residue does not exceed 1 mg.  
 Storage  –Store in tightly -closed containers, away from fire.  
 Labe lling  –The label on the container states “Flammable”.  
  Alcohol, Aldehyde -free.  –Alcohol which complies with the following additional test :  
 Aldehyde  –To 25 ml, contained in 300 ml flask, add 75 ml of dinitrophenyl hydrazine sol ution, 
heat on a water bath  under a reflux condenser for twenty four hours, remove the a lcohol by 
distillation, dilute to 200 ml with a 2 per cent v/v solution of sulphuric acid, and set aside for twenty four hours; no crystals are produced.  
 
Alcohol, Sulphate -free.  –Shake alcohol w ith an excess of anion exchange resin for thirty minutes 
and filter.   310  
Ammonia, x N . –Solutions of any normality xN may be prepared by diluting 75 x ml of strong 
ammonia solution to 1000 ml with water.  
 Ammonia Solution, Iron -free –Dilute ammonia solution w hich complies with the following 
additional test:  Evaporate 5 ml nearly to dryness on a water -bath add 40 ml of water, 2 ml of 20 per cent w/v 
solution of iron free citric acid  and 2 drops of thioglycollic acid , mix, make alkaline with iron- free 
ammonia s olution and dilute  to 50 ml with water , no pink colour is pr oduced. 
 Ammonia buffer solutions 9.5 pH  – Dissolve 67.5 g ammonium chloride  in 300 ml purified 
water , add 570 ml ammonia solution and dilute to 1000 ml. 
 
Ammonium Chloride Solution  –A 10.0 per c ent w/v solution of ammonium chloride  in water.  
 Ammonium molybdate  -NH
4Mo 7O24.4H 2O=1235.86 
Analytical reagent grade of commerce.  
White crystal or crystalline masses, sometimes with a yellowish or green tint. 
  
Ammonium Thiocyanate – NH 4SCN = 76.12. 
 
Description   –Colourless crystals.  
 
Solubility – Very soluble in water, forming a clear solution, readily soluble in alcohol. 
 Chloride –Dissolve 1 g in 30 ml of solution of hydrogen peroxide, add 1 g of sodium hydroxide , 
warm gently, rotate the flask until a v igorous reaction commences and allow to stand until the 
reaction is complete; add a further 30 ml of hydrogen peroxide solution boil for two minutes, cool, and add 10 ml of dilute nitric acid and 1 ml of silver nitrate solution ; any opalescence produced is  
not greater than that obtained by trea ting 0.2 ml of 0.01 N hydrochloric acid in the same manner.  
 Sulphated ash –Moisten 1 g with sulphuric acid and ignite gently, again moisten with sulphuric 
acid and i gnite; the residue weighs not more than 2.0 mg.  
 
Ammonium Thiocyanate, 0.1N  – NH
4SCN = 76.12; 7.612 in 1000 ml. Dissolve about 8 g of 
ammonium thiocyanate  in 100o ml of water and standardise the solution as fol lows :  
 
Pipette 30 ml of standardised 0.1 N silver nitrate into a glass stoppered flask, dilute w ith 50 
ml of water then add 2 ml of nitric acid and 2 ml of ferric ammonium sulphate solution and titrate 
with the ammonium thiocyanate solution to the first appearance of a red brown colour. Each ml of 
0.1N silver nitrate  is equivalent to 0.007612 g of NH 4SCN.  
 Ammonium Thiocyanate Solution  –A 10.0 per cent w/v solution of ammonium thi ocyanate 
solution.  
 Aniline chloride solution  – To 100 ml of aniline, add 30 ml of hydrochloric acid. (10:3).  
 Anisaldehyde -Sulphuric Acid Reagent –0.5 ml anisaldehyde is mix ed with 10 ml glacial acetic 
acid, followed by 85 ml methanol and 5 ml concentrated sulphuric acid in that order.  
 
The reagent has only limited stability and is no longer usable when the colour has turned to 
redviolet.   311  
Arsenomolyb dic Acid R eagent  -250 mg of ammonium molybdate was dissolved in 45 ml of 
distilled water. To this, 2.1 ml of concentrated H 2SO 4 was added and mixed well. To this solution, 
3mg of Na 2ASO 4.7 H 2O dissolved in 25 ml of distilled water, mixe d well and placed in incubator 
maintained at 370 C for 24 h. 
 Borax -  Sodium Tetraborate, Na
2B4O7. 10H 2O = 381.37.  
Contains not less than 99.0 per cent and not more than the equivalent of 103.0 per cent of Na 2B4O7. 
10H 2O. 
 
Description   –Transparent, colourless crystals, or a white, crystalline powde r; odourless, taste, 
saline and alk aline. Effloresces in dry air, and on ignition, loses all its water of crystallisation.  
 Solubility  –Soluble in water, practically insoluble in alcohol. 
 Alkalinity  –A solution is alkaline to litmus solution.  
 Heavy metal s  – Dissolve 1 g in 16 ml of water and 6 ml of N hydrochloric acid and add water to 
make 25 ml; the limit of heavy metals is 20 parts per million, Appe ndix 2.3.3. 
 Iron –0.5 g complies with the limit test for iron , Appendix 2.3.4. 
 Chlorides –1 g complies  with the limit test for chlorides,  Appendix 2.3.2.  
 Sulphates –1g complies with the limit test for sulphates,  Appendix 2.3.6. 
 Assay –Weigh accurately about 3 g and dissolve in 75 ml of water  and titrate with 0.5 N 
hydrochloric acid, using methyl red solu tion as indicator. Each ml of 0.5  N hydrochloric acid is 
equivalent to 0.09534 g of Na
2B4O7.10H 2O. 
 Storage – Preserve Borax in well -closed container. 
 Bromine  – Br
2 =159.80.  
 Description  –Reddish- brown, fuming, corrosive liquid. 
 Solubility  –Slightly solu ble in water , soluble in most organic solvents. 
 Iodine  –Boil 0.2 ml with 20 ml of  water , 0.2 ml of N sulphuric acid and a small piece of marble 
until the liquid is almost colourless. Cool, add one drop of liquefied phenol , allow to stand for two 
minutes, and then add 0.2 g of potassium iodide  and 1 ml of starch sol ution ; no blue colour is 
produced.  
 
Sulphate  –Shake 3 ml with 30 ml of dilute ammonia solution and evaporate to dryness on a water 
bath, the residue complies with the limit test for sulphates , Appendix 2.3.6.  
 
Bromine Solution  – Dissolve 9.6 ml of  bromine  and 30 g of potassium bromide in sufficient water 
to produce 100 ml. 
 Bromophenol Blue Indicator  – Dissolve 0.1 g of bromophenol blue in 3.0 ml of 0.05 N sodium 
hydroxide solution and 5 ml of eth yl alcohol (90 percent by volume) by gently warming. Make up 
the volume of the solution with ethyl alcohol (20 percent v/v) to 250 ml in a volumetric flask.  
Canada Balsam Reagent –General reagent grade of commerce.   312  
Carbon Tetra chloride –  CCl 4 = 153.82  
 Description   –Clear, colourless, volatile, liquid; odour, characte ristic.  
 Solubility  –Practically insoluble in water; miscible with ethyl alcohol, and with solvent ether.  
 Distillation range   –Not less than 95 per cent distils between 76
0 and 770.  
 Wt. p er ml  – At 20
0, 1.592 to 1.595 g.  
 Chloride, free acid  –Shake 20 ml with 20 ml of freshly boiled and cooled water for three minutes 
and allow separation to take place; the aqueous layer complies with the following test :  
 Chloride  – To 10 ml add one drop of nitric acid and 0.2 ml of silver nitrate solution ; no 
opalescence is produced.  
 Free acid  –To 10 ml add a few drops of bromocresol purple solution;  the colour produced does not 
indicate more acidity than that indicated by the addition of the same quantit y of the indicator to 10 
ml of freshly boiled and cooled water.  
 Free chlorine –Shake 10 ml with 5 ml of cadmium iodide solution and 1 ml of starch solution, no 
blue colour is pr oduced.  
 Oxidisable impurities  –Shake 20 ml for five minutes with a cold mixture of 10 ml of sulphuric 
acid and 10 ml of 0.1 N potassium dichromate , dilute with 100 ml of water and add 3 g of 
potassium  iodide  : the liberated iodine requires for decolourisation not less than 9 ml of 0.1 N 
sodium thiosulphate . 
 Non-volatile matter  –Leaves on evaporation on a water -bath and drying to constant weight at 105
0 
not more than 0.002 per cent w/v of residue.  
 Caustic Alkali Solution, 5 per cent  – Dissolve 5 g of potassium or sodium hydroxide in water and 
dilute to 100 ml.  
 Charcoal, Decolouris ing –General purpose grade complying with the following test.  
 Decolourising powder –Add 0.10 g to 50 ml of 0.006 per cent w/v solution of bromophenol blue  
in ethanol (20 per cent) contained in a 250 ml flask, and mix. Allow to stand for five minutes, and filter; the colour of the filtrate is not deeper than that of a solution prepared by diluting 1 ml of the bromophenol blue solution with ethanol (20 per cent) to 50 ml.  Chloral Hydrate –CCl
3.CH(OH) 2 = 165.40.  
 Description   –Colourless, transparent crystal s, odour, pungent but not acrid; taste, pungent and 
slightly bit ter, volatilises slowly on exposure to air. 
 Solubility  –Very soluble in water, freely soluble in alcohol , in chloroform and in solvent ether . 
 
Chloral alcoholate  – Warm 1 g with 6 ml of water  and 0.5 ml of sodium hydroxide solution : filter, 
add sufficient 0.1 N iodine  to impart a deep brown colour, and set aside for one hour; no yellow 
crystalline precipitate is produced and no smell of iodoform is pe rceptible.  
  313 Chloride  – 3 g complies with the limit test for chlorides, Appendix 2.3.2. 
 
Assay  – Weigh accurately about 4 g and dissolve in 10 ml of water  and add 30 ml of N sodium 
hydroxide. Allow the mixture to stand for two minutes, and then titrate with N sulphuric acid using 
phenolphthalein solution as indicator. Titrate the neutralised liquid with 0.1 N silver nitrate using 
solution of potassium chromate as indicator. Add two- fifteenth of the amount of 0.1 N silver nitrate 
used to the amount of N sulphuric acid used in the first titration and deduct the figure so obtained 
from the amount of N sodium hydroxide added. Each ml of N sodium hydroxide, obtained as 
difference; is equivalent to 0.1654 g of C 2H3Cl3O2. 
 
Storage  – Store in tightly closed, light resistant containers in a cool place.  
 
Chlor al Hydrate Solution  –Dissolve 20 g of chloral hydrate in 5 ml of wate r with warming and 
add 5 ml of glycerin . 
 
Chloral Iodine Solution  –Add an excess of crystalline iodine with shaking to the chloral hydrate 
solution, so that crystals of undissolved iodine  remain on the bottom of bottle. Shake before use as 
the iodine dissolves, and crystals of the iodine to the solution. Store in a bottle of amber glass in a place protected from light.  
 Chloroform – CHCl
3 = 119.38 
 Description   –Colourles, volatile liquid;  odour, characteristic. Taste, sweet and burning.  
 Solubility  –Slightly soluble in water; freely miscible with ethyl alcohol and with solvent ether.  
 Wt. per ml . : Between 1.474 and 1.478 g.  
 Boiling range  – A variable fraction, not exceeding 5 per cent v/ v, distils below 60
0 and the 
remainder distils between 500 to 620. 
 Acidity  –Shake 10 ml with 20 ml of freshly boiled and cooled water for three minutes, and allow to 
separate. To a 5 ml portion of the aqueous layer add 0.1 ml of litmus solution ; the colour produced 
is not diffe rent from that produced on adding 0.1 ml of litmus solution to 5 ml of freshly boiled and 
cooled water . 
 
Chloride  –To another 5 ml portion of the aqueous layer obtained in the test for Acidity, add 5 ml of 
water and 0.2 ml of silver nitrate solution ; no opalescence is pr oduced.  
 
Free chlorine –To another 10 ml portion of the aqueous layer, obtained in the test for Acidity, add 
1 ml of cadmium iodide solution and two drops of starch solution; no blue colour is produced.  
 Aldehyde –Shak e 5 ml with 5 ml of water and 0.2 ml of alkaline potassium mercuri -iodide  
solution in a stoppered bottle and set aside in the dark for fifteen minutes; not more than a pale 
yellow colour is produced.  Decomposition products  – Place 20 ml of the chloroform in a glass -stoppered flask, previously 
rinsed with sulphuric acid, add 15 ml of sulphuric acid and four drops of formaldehyde solution, 
and shake the mi xture frequently during half an hour and set aside for further half an hour, the flask 
being protected f rom light du ring the test; the acid layer is not more than slightly coloured.  
 Foreign organic matter  – Shake 20 ml with 10 ml of sulphuric acid in a stoppered vessel 
previously rinsed with sulphuric acid for five minutes and set aside in the dark for thir ty minutes,  314 both the acid and chloroform layers remain colourless. To 2 ml of the acid layer add 5 ml of water; 
the liquid remains colourless and clear, and has no unpleasent odour. Add a further 10 ml of water and 0.2 ml of silver nitrate solution ; no opa lescence is produced.  
 Foreign odour  –Allow 10 ml to evaporate from a large piece of filter paper placed on a warm 
plate; no foreign odour is detectable at any stage of the evaporation.  
 Non volatile matter  – Not more than 0.004 per cent w/v determined on 25 ml by evaporation and 
drying at 105
0. 
 
Storage  -  Store in tightly -closed, glass -stoppered, light -resistant bottles.  
 Copper Sulphate  – CuSO
4.5H 2O = 249.68 
 
Contains not less than 98.5 per cent and not more than the equivalent of 101.0 per cent of 
CuSO 4.5H 2O. 
 Description   – Blue triclinic prisms or a blue, crystalline powder.  
 Solubility  –Soluble in water , very solube in boiling water, almost insoluble in alcohol ; very slowly 
soluble in glycerin.  Acidity and clarity of solution  – 1 g, dissolved in 20 ml of water, forms a clear blue solution, 
which becomes green on the addition of 0.1 ml of methyl orange sol ution . 
   
Iron  – To 5 g, add 25 ml of water, and 2 ml of nitric acid, boil and cool. Add excess of strong 
ammonia sol ution , filter, and wash the residue with dilute ammonia solution mixed with four times 
its volumes of water. Dissolve the residue, if any, on the filter with 2 ml of hydrochloric acid, diluted with 10 ml of water; to the acid solutions add dilute ammonia solution till the precipitation 
is complete; filter and wash; the res idue after ignition weighs not more than 7 mg.  
 Copper Sulphate, Anhydrous – CuSO
4 =159.6 
 Prepared by heating copper sulphate to constant weight at about 230
0. 
 
Copper Sulphate Solution –A10.0 per cent w/v solution of co pper sulphate in w ater. 
 Cresol Red – 4,4
/, –(3H -2, 1-Benzoxathiol -3 ylidene) di -O-cresol SS -dioxide; C 12H8O5S = 382.4.  
 Gives a red colour in very strongly acid solutions, a yellow colour in less strongly acid and neutral solutions, and a red colour in m oderately alkaline solutions ( pH ranges, 0.2 to 1.8, and 7.2 to 8.8). 
 
Cresol Red Solution –Warm 50 ml of cresol red with 2.65 ml of 0.05 M sodium hydroxide and 5 
ml of ethanol (90 per cent); after solution is effected, add sufficient etha nol (20 per cent)  to produce 
250 ml.  Sensitivity  –A mixitue of 0.1 ml of the solution and 100 ml of carbon dioxide -free water  to which 
0.15 ml of 0.02 M s odium hydroxide  has been added is purplish- red. Not more than 0.15 ml of 0.02 
M hydrochloric acid is required to chang e the colour to yellow.  
 Diphenylamine barium sulphonate  – Dissolve 0.25 g in 100 ml water.   315 Disodium Ethylenediamine tetraacetate – (Disodium Acetate) C 10H14N2Na2O8.2H 2O = 372.2, 
Analytical reagent grade.  
 
Dragendorff Á  Ás Reagent – 
 
Solution 1  –Dissolve 0 .85 g of bismuth oxy nitrate  in 40 ml of water and 10 ml of acetic acid.  
 
Solution 2 –Dissolve 8 g of potassium iodide  in 20 ml of water.  
 Mix equal volumes of solution 1 and 2, and to 10 ml of the resultant mixture add 100 ml of water and 20 ml of acetic  acid.  
 Dithizone -1,5-Diphenylthiocarbazone;Diphenylthiocarbazone;  C
6H5N:NCSNHNHC 6H5= 56.32 
Analytical Reagent grade of commerce.  
Almost black powder; mp, about 1680, with decomposition.  
Store in light- resistant containers.  
 
Eosin – Acid Red 87; Tetrabromofluorescein disodium salt; C 20H6O5Br4Na2 =691.86. 
 Description   – Red powder, dissolves in water to yield a yellow to purplish- red solution with a 
greenish-yellow fluorescence.  
 
Solubility  –Soluble in water and in alcohol.  
 Chloride –Dissolve 50 mg in 25 m l of water , add 1 ml of nitric acid , and filter; the filtrate 
complies with the limit test for chlorides , Appendix 2.3.2.  
 Sulphated ash –Not more than 24.0 per cent, calculated with reference to the substance dried at 
110
0 for two hours, Appendix 2.2.6.  
 
EDTA solution 0.05 M  – Dissolve 18.6120 g of sodium salt of EDTA in purified water and make 
up to 1000 ml.  
 
Eosin Solution – A 0.5 per cent w/v solution of eosin in water.  
 Eriochrome Black T – Mordant Black 11; Sodium 2(1- hydroxy -2-naphthylazo) 5- nitro -2-naphtol -
4-sulphonate; C
20H12N3NaO 7S = 461.38. 
 Brownish black powder having a faint, metallic sheen, soluble in alcohol, in methyl alcohol  and in 
hot water.  
 Eriochrome Black T indicator 0.1per cent solution  – Dissolve 0.10 g indicator in 100 ml of 
Methanol . 
 
Ethyl Acetate – CH
3. CO 2C2H5 = 88.11. 
 
Analytical reagent grade.  
 A colourless liquid with a fruity odour; boiling point, about 77
0; weight per ml about 0.90g.  
 Ethyl Alcohol – C
2H5OH = 46.07.  
 Absolute Alcohol; Dehydrated Alcohol.   316  
Description  – Clear,  colourless, mobile, volatile liquid; odour, characteristic and spirituous; taste, 
burning; hygroscopic. Readily volatilisable even at low temperature and boils at 780 and is 
flammable.  
 Solubility  – Miscible with water, with solvent ether and with chloro form.  
 Contains not less than 99.5 per cent w/w or 99.7 per cent v/v of C
2H5OH. 
 
Identification  – Acidity or Alkalinity: Clarity of Solution; Methanol; Foreign organic substances; 
Isopropyl alcohol and butyl alcohol; Aldehydes and ketones; fusel oil consti tuents; Non- volatile 
matter; complies with the requirements described under A lcohol.  
 Specific gravity  –Between 0.7871 and 0.7902, at 25
0. 
 Storage  –Store in tightly closed containers in a cool place away from fire and protected from 
moisture.  
 Labelling  –The label on the container states “Flammable”.  
 
Fehling ’s Solution –  
 
A. Dissolve 69.278 g of CuSO4. 5H
2O in water and make the volume up to 1 litre  
B. Dissolve 100 g of sodium hydroxide and 340 g of Sodium potassium tartarate in water 
and make the volume to 1 litre.  
 Mix equal volumes of A and B be fore the experiment.  
 
Formaldehyde Solution – Formalin; HCHO =30.03  Formaldehyde Solution is a solution of formaldehyde in water with methyl alcohol  added to prevent 
polymerisation. It contains not less than 34.0 per  cent w/w and not more than 38.0 per cent w/w of 
CH
2O. 
 
Description  – Colourless liquid; odour, characteristic, pungent and irritating; taste, burning. A 
slight white cloudy deposit is formed on long standing, especially in the cold, due to the separation of paraformaldehyde. This white deposit disappears on warming the solution. Solubility  –Miscible with water , and with alcohol . 
 Acidity  –To 10 ml add 10 ml of carbon dioxide free water and titrate with 0.1 N sodium hydroxide 
using bromothymol blue solutions as indicator; not more than 5 ml of 0.1 N sodium hy droxide is 
required.  
 
Wt. per ml  – At 20
0, 1.079 to 1.094 g.  
 
Assay –Weigh accurately about 3 g and add to a mixture of 50 ml of hydrogen peroxide solution 
and 50 ml of N sodium hydroxide , warm on a wat er-bath until effervescence ceases and titrate the 
excess of alkali with N sulphuric acid using phenolphthalein solution as indicator. Repeat the 
experiment with the same quantities of the same reagents in the same manner omitting the formaldehyde solution. The difference between the titrations represents the sodium hydroxide required to neutralise the formic acid produced by the oxida tion of the formaldehyde. Each ml of N 
sodium hydroxide is equivalent to 0.03003 g of CH
2O.  
  317 Storage –Preserve Formaldehyde Solution in well -closed container preferably at a temperature not 
below 150. 
 
Formaldehyde Solution, Dilute –  Dilute 34 ml of formaldehyde solution with sufficient water to 
produce 100 ml.  
 Folin C iocalteu R eagent - Dilute commercially available Folin -Cioc alteu reagen t (2N) with an 
equal volume of distilled water. Transfer it in a brown bottle and store in a refrigerator (4
0). It 
should be goldern in colour. Do not use it if it turns olive green.  
 Formic acid - HCOOH = 46.03  
 Description  -Colourless liquid, odour, very pungent, highly corrosive; wt per ml. about 1.20 g, 
contains about 90.0 per cent of HCOOH and is about 23.6 M in strength.  
 Assay  - Weigh accurately, a conical flask containing 10ml of water, quickly add about 1ml of the 
reagent being examined  and weigh again. Add 50ml of water and titrate with 1M sodium hydroxide  
using 0.5 ml of phenolphthalein solution as indicator. Each ml of 1 M sodium hydroxide  is 
equivalent to 0.04603 g of HCOOH.  
 
Glycerine – C
3H8O3 = 82.09. 
 
Description  – Clear, colorless , liquid of syrupy consistency; odourless, taste sweet followed by a 
sensation of warmth. It is hygroscopic.  
 Solubility  –Miscible with water and with alcohol ; practically insoluble in chloroform, in solvent 
ether and in fixed oils.  Acidity  –To 50 ml of a  50 per cent w/v solution add 0.2 ml of dilute phenolphthalein solution ; not 
more than 0.2 ml of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide  is required to produce a pink colour. 
 Wt. per ml  –Between 1.252 g and 1.257 g, corresponding to between 98.0 per cent and 100.0 per 
cent w/w of C
3H8O3. 
 
Refractive index  –Between 1.470 and 1.475 determined at 200.  
 
Arsenic –Not more than 2 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.1.  
 Copper  –To 10 ml add 30 ml of water , and 1 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid, and 10 ml of 
hydrogen sulphide solution; no colour is produced.  Iron  – 10 g complies with the limit test for iron, Appendix 2.3.4.  
 Heavy metals  – Not more than 5 parts per million, determined by Method A on a solution of 4 g in 
2 ml of 0.1 N hydrochloric acid and sufficient water to produce 25 ml, A ppendix 2.3.3.  
 Sulphate –1 ml complies with the limit test for sulphates, Appendix 2.3.6.  Chloride  –1 ml complies with the limit test for chloride, Appendix 2.3.2. 
 Acraldehyde and glucose  –Heat strongly; it assumes not more than a faint yellow, a nd not a pink 
colour. Heat further; it burns with little or no charring and with no odour of burnt sugar.  
  318 Aldehydes and related substances  – To 12.5 ml of a 50 per cent w/v solution in a glass -stoppered 
flask add 2.5 ml of water and 1 ml of decolorised magenta solution. Close the flask and allow to 
stand for one hour. Any violet colour produced is not more intense than that produced by mixing 
1.6 ml of 0.1 N potassium permanganate and 250 ml of water . 
 Sugar  – Heat 5 g with 1 ml of dilute sulphuric acid for five minutes on a water -bath. Add 2 ml of 
dilute sodium hydroxide solution and 1 ml of copper sulphate solution. A clear, blue coloured 
solution is produced. Continue heating on the water -bath for five minutes. The solution remains 
blue and no precipitat e is formed.  
 Fatty acids and esters  –Mix 50 ml with 50 ml of freshly boiled water  and 50.0 ml of 0.5N sodium 
hydrox ide, boil the mixture for five minutes. Cool, add a few drops of phenolphthalein solution and 
titrate the e xcess alkali with 0.5 N hydrochloric acid . Perform a blank determination, not more than 
1 ml of 0.5 N sodium hy droxide  is consumed.  
 Sulphated ash –Not more than 0.01 per cent, Appendix 2.2.6.  
 
Storage  – Store in tightly -closed containers.  
 Glycerin Solution – Dilute 33 ml of glycerin  to 100 ml with water and add a small piece of 
camphor or liquid phenol. 
 n- Hexane  - C
6H14,= 86.18 
Analytical reagent grade of commerce containing not less than 90.05 of n- Hexane.  
 Colourless, mobile, highly flammable liquid, bp 68
0; wt per ml, about 0.674 g.  
 
Hydrochloric Acid – HCl = 36.46 
 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid  
 Description   – Clear, colourless, fuming liquid; odour, pungent.  
 Arsenic – Not more than 1 part per million, Appendix 2.3.1.  
 Heavy metals  – Not more than 5 parts per million, determined b y Method A on a solution prepared 
in the following manner : Evaporate 3.5 ml to dryness on a water -bath, add 2 ml of dilute acetic 
acid to the residue, and add water to make 25 ml, Appendix 2.3.3.  
 Bromide and iodide  – Dilute 5 ml with 10 ml of water , add 1 ml of chloroform , and add drop by 
drop, with constant shaking, chlorinated lime solution; the chloroform layer does not become 
brown or violet.  
 Sulphite  – Dilute 1 ml with 10 ml of water, and add 5 drops of barium chloride solution and 0.5 ml 
of 0.001 N  iodine ; the colour of the iodine is not completely di scharged.  
 Sulphate – To 5 ml add 10 mg of sodium bicarbonate and evaporate to dryness on a water bath; the 
residue, dissolved in water ; complies with the limit test for sulphates , Appe ndix. 2.3.7.  
 Free chlorine – Dilute 5 ml with 10 ml of freshly boiled and cooled water , add 1 ml of cadmium  
iodide solution, and shake with 1 ml of chloroform ; the chloroform layer does not become violet 
within one minute. 
  319 Sulphated ash –Not more than 0.01 per cent, Appe ndix 2.2.6.  
 
Assay –Weigh accurately about 4 g into a stoppered flask containing 40 ml of water, and titrare 
with N sodium hydroxide , using methyl orange solution as indicator. Each ml of N sodium 
hydroxide is equivalent to 0.03646 g of HCl.  Storage – Sto re in glass -stoppered containers at a temperature not exceeding 30
0. 
 Hydrochloric Acid, x N  –Solution of any normality x N may be prepared by diluting 84 x ml of 
hydrochloric acid to 1000 ml with water . 
 Hydrochloric Acid – (1 per cent w/v) Dilute 1 g of hydrochloric  acid to 100 ml with water.  
 
Dilute Hydrochloric Acid –  
 
Description   –Colourless liquid.  
 
Arsenic, Heavy metals bromoide and iodide, Sulphate, free chlorine –Complies with the tests described under Hydrochloric Acid, when three times the quant ity is taken for each test.  
 Assay  –Weigh accurately about 10 g and carry out the Assay described under Hydrochl oric Acid.  
 Storage –Store in stoppered containers of glass or other inert material, at temperature below    30
0. 
 Hydrochloric Acid, N – HCl =  36.460 
 36.46 g in 1000 ml  
 Dilute 85 ml of hydrochloric acid with water to 1000 ml and standardise the solution as follows:  
 Weigh accurately about 1.5 g of anhydrous sodium carbonate, previously heated at about 270
0 for 
one hour. Dissolve it in 100 ml of water and add two drops of methyl red solution . Add the acid 
slowly from a burette with constant stirring, until the solution becomes faintly pink. Heat again to boiling and titrate further as necessary until the faint pink colour no longer affected by c ontinued 
boiling. Each 0.5299 g of anhydrous s odium carbonate is equivalent to 1 ml of N hydrochloric acid.  
 
Hydrochloric Acid, Iron -Free  – Hydrochloric acid, which complies with the following additional 
test. Evaporate 5 ml on a water -bath nearly to dryne ss, add 40 ml of water, 2 ml of a 20 per cent 
w/v solution of citric acid and two drops of thioglycollic acid, mix, make alkaline with dilute ammonia solution, and dilute to 50 ml with water; no pink col our is produced. 
   
Hydrogen Peroxide Solution  – (20 Vol.) H
2O2 = 34.02 
 Analytical reagent grade of commerce or  hydrogen peroxide solution (100 Vol.) diluted with 4 
volumes of water.  
 A colourless liquid containing about 6 per cent w/v of H
2O2; weight per ml, about 1.02 g.  
 Hydroxylamine  Hydroc hloride; Hydrox ylammonium Chloride – NH
2OH.HCl = 69.49.  
 Contains not less than 97.0 per cent w/w of NH
2OH. HCI.  
 
Description  –Colourless crystals, or a white, crystalline powder.   320  
Solubility –Very soluble in water; soluble in alcohol.  Free acid –Dissolve 1.0 g in 50 m l of alcohol , add 3 drops of dimethyl yellow solution and titrate to 
the full yellow colour with N sodium hydroxide ; not more than 0.5 ml of N sodium hydroxide is 
required.  
 Sulphated ash –Not more than 0.2 per cent, Appendix 2.2.6.  
 Assay –Weigh accuratel y about 0.1 g and dissolve in 20 ml of water, add 5 g of ferric ammonium 
sulphate dissolve in 20 ml of water, and 15 ml of dilute sulphuric acid, boil for five minutes, dilute with 200 ml of water, and titrate with 0.1 N potassium permanganate . Each ml of 0.1 N potassium 
permanganate is equivalent to 0.003475 g of NH
2OH. HCl.  
 Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride  Solution – Dissolve 1 g of  hydroxylamine hydrochloride in 50 ml 
of water and add 50 ml of alcohol, 1 ml of bromophenol blue solution and 0.1 N sodium hydroxide 
until the solution be comes green.  
 Mercuric Chloride –HgCl
2  =271.50.  
 Contains not less than 99.5 per cent of HgCl
2; 
 Description   –Heavy, colourless or white, crystalline masses, or a white crystalline powder.  
 Solubility  –Soluble in water ; freely s oluble in alcohol . 
 Non-volatile matter –When volatilised, leaves not more than 0.1 per cent of residue.  
 Assay –Weigh accurately about 0.3 g and dissolve in 85 ml of water in a stoppered -flask, add 10 
ml of calcium chloride solution, 10 ml of potassium iodide solution, 3 ml of formaldehyde solution and 15 ml of s odium hydroxide solution, and shake continuously for two minutes. Add 20 ml of 
acetic acid and 35 ml of 0.1  N iodine. Shake continuously for about ten minutes, or until the 
precipitated mercury is completely redissolved, and titrate the excess of iodine with 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate . Each ml of 0.1 N iodine is  equiva lent to 0.01357 g of HgCl
2. 
 
Mercuric Chloride, 0.2 M – Dissolve 54.30 g of mercuric chloride in sufficient water to produce 
1000 ml. 
 
Mercuric Chloride  Solution –A 5.0 per cent w/v solution of mercuric chloride in water.  
 Mercuric Potassium Iodide Solution  – See Potassium -  Mercuric Iodide solution.  
 Methyl Alcohol : Methanol : CH
3OH = 32.04. 
 
Description   –Clear, Colourless liquid with  a characteristic odour.  
 Solubility  –Miscible with water, forming a clear colourless liquid.  
 Specific Gravity – At 25
0, not more than 0.791. 
 Distillation range   – Not less than 95 per cent distils between 64.5
0 and 65.50. 
 
Refractive Index –At 200, 1.328 to 1.329.   321  
Acetone –Place 1 ml in a Nessler cylinder , add 19 ml of water, 2 ml of a 1 per cent w/v solution of 
2-nitrobenzaldehyde  in alcohol (50 per cent) , 1 ml of 30 per cent w/v solution of sodium hydroxide 
and allow to stand in the dark for fifteen m inutes. The colour deve loped does not exceed that 
produced by mixing 1 ml of standard acetone solution, 19 ml of water, 2 ml of the solution of 2-nitrobenzaldehyde  and 1 ml of the solution of s odium hydroxide  and allowing to stand in the dark 
for fifteen m inutes. 
 Acidity  –To 5 ml add 5 ml of carbon dioxide -free water , and titrate with 0.1 N sodium hydroxide , 
using br omothymol blue solution as indicator; not more than 0.1 ml is required.  
 Non-volatile matter  – When evaporated on a water -bath and dried to co nstant weight at 105º, 
leaves not more than 0.005 per cent w/v of residue.  Methyl Alcohol, Dehydrated  –Methyl alcohol, which complies with the following additional 
requirement.  
 Water  –Not more than 0.1 per cent w/w.  
 Methyl Orange – Sodium -p-di methylamineazobenzene sulphate, C
14H14O3N3SNa.  
 An orange -yellow powder or crystalline scales, slightly soluble in cold water; insoluble in alcohol; 
readily soluble in hot water.  
 Methyl Orange Solution  –Dissolve 0.1 g of methyl orange in 80 ml of water and dilute  to 100 ml 
with alc ohol.  
 Test for sensitivity  –A mixture of 0.1 ml of the methyl orange solution and 100 ml freshly boiled 
and cooled water is yellow. Not more than 0.1 ml of 0.1 N hydrochloric acid is required to change the colour to red.  
 
Colour change  – pH 3.0 (red) to pH 4.4 (yellow).  
 Methyl Red  – p-Dimethylaminoazobenzene -O-carboxylic acid, C
15H15O2N3. 
 
A dark red powder or violet crystals, sparingly soluble in water ; soluble in alcohol. 
 Methyl red solution –Dissolve 100 mg in 1.86 ml of 0.1 N sodi um hydroxide and 50 ml of alcohol 
and di lute to 100 ml with water.  
 Test for sensitivity –A mixture of 0.1 ml of the methyl red solution and 100 ml of freshly boiled 
and cooled water to which 0.05 ml of 0.02 N hydrochloric acid has been added is red. Not m ore 
than 0.01 ml of 0.02 N sodium hydroxide is required to change the colour to yellow.  
 Colour change – pH 4.4 (red) to pH 6.0 (yellow).  
 
Molish’s Reagent –Prepare two solutions in separate bottles, with ground glass stoppers:  
 
(a) Dissolve 2 g of α -napht hol in 95 per cent alcohol and make upto 10 ml with alcohol ( α-naphthol 
can be replaced by thymol or resorcinol). Store in a place protected from light. The solution can be used for only a short p eriod. 
        
(b) Concentrated sulphuric acid.  322  
Nitric Acid  –Contains 70.0 per cent w/w of HNO 3 (limits, 69.0 to 71.0). About 16 N in strength.  
 
Description   –Clear, colourless, fuming liquid.  
 Wt. per ml . – At 20
0, 1.41 to 1.42 g.  
 Copper and Zinc –Dilute 1 ml with 20 ml of water, and add a slight excess of dilute ammonia solution; the mixture does not become blue. Pass hydrogen sulphide; a precipitate is not produced.  
 Iron  –0.5 ml of complies with the limit test for iron, Appendix 2.3.4.  
 Lead –Not more than 2 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.5.  
 Chloride  –5 ml n eutralised with dilute ammonia solution, complies with the limit test for chlorides, 
Appendix 2.3.2.  
 Sulphates –To 2.5 ml add 10 mg of sodium bicarbonate and evaporate to dryness on a water -bath, 
the residue dissolved in water, complies with the limit tes t for sulphates, A ppendix 2.3.7.  
 Sulphated ash  – Not more than 0.01 per cent w/w, Appendix 2.2.6.  Assay  –Weigh accurately about 4 g into a stoppered flask containing 40 ml of water, and titrate 
with N Sodium hydroxide, using methyl orange solution as indicator. Each ml of N sodium hydroxide is equivalent to 0.06301 g of HNO
3. 
 Nitric Acid, x  N –Solutions of any normality XN may be prepared by diluting 63x ml of nitric acid 
to 1000 ml with water.  Nitric Acid, Dilute –Contains approximately 10 per cent w/ w of HNO
3. Dilute 106 ml of nitric 
acid to 1000 ml with water.  
 Petroleum  Light – Petroleum Spirit.  
 Description  – Colourless, very volatile, highly flammable liquid obtained from petroleum, 
consisting of a mi xture of the lower members of the paraffin ser ies of hydrocarbons and complying 
with one or other of the fol lowing definitions :  
 
Light Petroleum  –(Boiling range, 30
0 to 400). 
 Wt. per ml.  –At 20
0, 0.620 to 0.630 g.  
 
Light Petroleum  –(Boiling range, 400 to 600). 
 
Wt. per ml  –At 200, 0.630 to 0.650 g.  
 
Light Petroleum  –(Boiling range, 600 to 800). 
 Wt. per ml . –At 20
0, 0.670 to 0.690. 
 Light Petroleum  –(Boiling range, 80
0 to 1000). 
 
Wt. per ml . –At 200, 0.700 to 0.720  323  
Light Petroleum  –(Boiling range, 1000 to 1200). 
 Wt. per ml  –At 20
0, 0.720 to 0.740 g . 
 
Light Petroleum  –(Boiling range, 1200 to 1600). 
 
Wt. per ml  –At 200, about 0.75 g.  
 Non-volatile matter  –When evaporated on a water -bath and dried at 105
0, leaves not more than 
0.002 per cent w/v of residue.  Patterns & Reeders indicators 0.1per cent  solution  – Dissolve 0.01g indicator in 100 ml of 
Methanol. 
 
Phenolphthalein –C
20H14O4. 
 
A white to yellowish -white powder, practically insoluble in water, soluble in a lcohol. 
 Phenolpthalein indicator  – Dissolve 0.5 gm Phenolpthalein in 100 ml of  
50% ethyl a lcohol (v/v).  
  
Phenolphthalein Solution –Dissolve 0.10 g in 80 ml of alcohol and dilute to 100 ml with water.  
 
Test for sensitivity  –To 0.1 ml of the phenolphthalein solution add 100 ml of freshly boiled and 
cooled water, the solution is colourless. Not m ore than 0.2 ml of 0.02  N sodium hydroxide is 
required to change the colour to pink. 
 
Colour change  – pH 8.2 (colourless) to pH 10.0 (red)  
 
Phloroglucinol – 1 , 3 , 5 – Trihydroxybenzene , C
6H3(OH) 3 . 2H 2O. 
 Description   – White or yellowish crystals or a crystalline powder.  
 Solubility  –Slightly soluble in water; soluble in alcohol , and in solvent ether . 
 Melting range –After drying at 110
0 for one hour, 2150 to 2190. 
 Sulphated ash – Not more than 0.1 per cent, Appendix 2.2.6.  
 Phloroglucinol should be ke pt protected from light. 
 Phosphoric Acid – H
3PO 4 = 98.00. 
 (Orthophosphoric Acid; Concentrated Phosphoric Acid).  
 Description  –Clear and colourless syrupy liquid, corrosive.  
 Solubility –Miscible with water and with alcohol.  
 Phosphoric Acid, x N –Soluti ons of any normality, x N may be prepared by diluting 49 x g of 
phosphoric acid with water to 1000 ml.   324  
Phosphoric Acid, Dilute – 
 
Contains approximately 10 per cent w/v of H 3PO 4. 
 
Dilute 69 ml of phosphoric acid to 1000 ml with water.  
 Potassium Chloride –KCl = 74.55 
 
Analytical reagent grade  
 Potassium Chromate – K
2CrO 4 = 194.2 
 
Analytical reagent grade  
 Potassium Chromate Solution –A 5.0 per cent w/v solution of potassium chr omate.  
 Gives a red precipitate with silver nitrate in neutral solutions.  
 Potas sium Cupri c-Tartrate Solution –Cupric Tatrate Alkaline Solution: Fehling’s Solution.  
  
(1) Copper Solution  – Dissolve 34.66 g of carefully selected small crystals of copper 
sulphate, showing no trace of efflorescence or of adhering moisture, in sufficient wat er to 
make 500 ml. Keep this solution in small, well -stoppered bottles.  
  (2) Alkaline Tartrate Solution  – Dissolve 176 g of sodium potassium tartrate and 77 g of 
sodium hydroxide in sufficient water to produce 500 ml. 
 Mix equal volumes of the solutions No. 1 and No. 2 at the time of using.  
 Potassium Dichromate – K
2Cr2O7 =294.18. 
 Contains not less than 99.8 per cent of K
2Cr2O7. 
  
Description   – Orange- red crystals or a crystalline powder.  
 Solubility  – Soluble in water  
 Chloride  –To 20 ml of a 5 per cent w/v solution in water and 10 ml nitric acid, warm to about 
50
0and add a few drops of silver nitrate solution ; not more than a faint opale scence is produced.  
 Assay  –Carry out the assay described under Potassium Chromate, using 2 g. Each ml of 0.1  N 
sodium thiosulphate is equivalent to 0.004904 g of K
2Cr2O7. 
 Potassium Dichromate Solution – A 7.0 per cent w/v solution of potassium dichromate in water.  
 
Potassium Dichromate, Solution 0.1N  – K
2Cr2O7 = 294.18, 4.903 g in 1000 ml. 
 Weigh accurately 4.903 g of potassium dichromate and dissolve in sufficient water to produce 1000 ml. 
  325 Potassium Dihydrogen Phosphate -  KH 2PO 4 = 136.1 
 
Analytical reagent grade of commerce.  
 
Potassium Ferrocyanide – K 4Fe(CN) 6.3H 2O =422.39. 
 Contains not less than 99.0 per cent of K
4Fe(CN )6.3H 2O. 
  
Description   –Yellow, crystalline powder.  
 Solubility  –Soluble in water.  
 Acidity or Alkalinity  –A 10 per cent w/v solution in water is neutral to litmus paper.  
 Assay  –Weigh accurately about 1g and dissolve in 200 ml of water, add 10 ml of sulphuric acid 
and titrate with 0.1  N potassium permanganate. Each ml of 0.1 N potassium permanganate is 
equivalent to 0.04224 g of K
4Fe (CN) 6. 3H 2O. 
 Potassium Ferrocyanide Solution  –A 5.0 per cent w/v solution of potassium ferrocy anide in 
water.  
 Potassium H ydrogen Phthalate –CO
2H. C 6H4. CO 2K =204.22. 
 Contains not less than 99.9 per cent and not more than the equivalent of 100.1 per cent of C
8H5O4K 
calculated with reference to the substance dried at 1100 for one hour.  
 Description  –White, crystalline powder . 
 Solubility –Slowly soluble in water,  forming clear, colourless solution. 
 Acidity –A 2.0 per cent w/v solution in carbon dioxide free water gives with bromophenol blue 
solution the grey colour indicative of pH 4.0.  
 Assay  –Weigh accurately about 9 g, di ssolve in 100 ml of water and titrate with  N sodium 
hydroxide using phenolphthalein solution as indicator. Each ml of  N Sodium hydroxide  is 
equivalent to 0.2042 g of C
8H5O4K. 
 Potassium Hydrogen Phthalate, 0.02 M – Dissolve 4.084 g of Potassium hydrogen phthalate in 
sufficient water to produce 1000 ml.  Potassium Hydrogen Phthalate, 0.2 M – Dissolve 40.84 g of potassium hydrogen phthalate in 
sufficient water  to produce 1000 ml. 
 Potassium Hydroxide – Caustic Potash : KOH = 56.11 
   
Contains not less than 85.0 per cent of total alkali, calculated as KOH and not more than 4.0 per cent of K
2CO 3. 
 Description  – Dry white sticks, pellets or fused mass; hard, brittle and showing a crystalline 
fracture; very deliquescent; strongly alkaline and corrosive.  
 Solubility  –Freely soluble in water, in alcohol and in glycerin; very soluble in boiling ethyl 
alcohol.  326 Aluminium, iron and matter insoluble in hydrochloric acid –Boil 5 g with 40 ml of dilute 
hydrochl oric acid , cool, make alkaline with dilute ammonia solution, boil, filter and wash the 
residue with a 2.5 per cent w/v solution of ammonium nitrate; the insoluble residue, after i gnition to 
constant weight, weighs not more than 5 mg.  
 
Chloride  –0.5 g dissolved in water with the additon of 1.6 ml of nitric acid, complies w ith the limit 
test for chlorides, Appendix 2.3.2.  
 Heavy metals  –Dissolve 1 g in a mixture of 5 ml of water and 7 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid. 
Heat to boiling, add 1 drop of phenolphthalein solution and dilute ammonia solution dropwise to produce a fain t pink colour. Add 2 ml of acetic acid and water to make 25 ml; the limit of heavy 
metals is 30 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.3.  
 Sulphate  –Dissolve 1 g in water with the addition of 4.5 ml of hydrochloric acid; the sol ution 
complies with the limit test for sulphates, Appendix 2.3.6.  
 Sodium  –To 3 ml of a 10 per cent w/v solution add 1 ml of water, 1.5 ml of alcohol, and 3 ml of 
potassium antimonate solution and allow to stand; no white crystalline precipitate or sediment is visible to the naked eye withi n fifteen minutes.  
 Assay  –Weigh accurately about 2 g, and dissolve in 25 ml of water, add 5 ml of barium chloride 
solution, and titrate with N hydrochloric acid, using phenolphthalein solution as indicator. To the solution in the flask add bromophenol blue solution, and continue the titration with N hydrochloric acid. Each ml of N hydrochloric acid, used in the second titration in equivalent to 0.06911 g of K
2CO 3 . Each ml of N hydrochloric acid, used in the combined titration is equivalent to 0.05611 g 
of total alkali, calculated as KOH.  
 Storage –Potassium Hydroxide should be kept in a well -closed container.  
 Potassium Hydroxide, x N – Solution of any normality, x N, may be prepared by dissolving 
56.11x g of potassium h ydroxide in water and diluting to 1000 ml. 
 Potassium Hydroxide Solution  –Solution of Potash. 
 An aqueous solution of potassium hydroxide containing 5.0 per cent w/v of total alkali, calculated as KOH (limits, 4.75 to 5.25).  Assay  –Titrate 20 ml with N sulphuric acid, using solution of meth yl orange as indicator. Each ml 
of N sulphuric acid is equivalent to 0.05611 g of total alkali, calculated as KOH.  
 Storage  –Potassium hydroxide solution should be kept in a well -closed container of lead -free glass 
or of a suitable plastic.  
 Potassium Iodi de –KI = 166.00 
 Description  – Colourless crystals or white powder; odourless, taste, saline and slightly bitter.  
 Solubility  –Very soluble in water and in glycerin; soluble in alcohol. 
 Arsenic –Not more than 2 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.1.  
 Heavy m etals  - Not more than 10 parts per million, determined on 2.0 g by Method A, A ppendix 
2.3.3.  327 Barium –Dissolve 0.5 g in 10 ml of water and add 1 ml of dilute sulphuric acid; no turbi dity 
develops within one minute. 
 
Cyanides –Dissolve 0.5 g in 5 ml of warm water, add one drop of ferrous sulphate sol ution  and 0.5 
ml of sodium hydroxide solution and acidify with hydrochloric acid; no blue colour is produced.  
 
Iodates  –Dissolve 0.5 g in 10 ml of freshly boiled and cooled water, and add 2 drops of di lute 
sulphur ic acid and a drop of starch solution; no blue colour is produced within two minutes.  
 Assay –Weigh accurately about 0.5 g, dissolve in about 10 ml of water and add 35 ml of 
hydrochloric acid and 5 ml of chloroform. Titrate with 0.05 M potassium iodate unt il the purple 
colour of iodine disappears from the chloroform. Add the last portion of the iodate solution drop-wise and agitate vigorously and continuously. Allow to stand for five minutes. If any colour develops in the chloroform layer continue the titr ation. Each ml of 0.05 M potassium iodate is 
equivalent to 0.0166 mg of KI.  
 Storage  –Store in well- closed containers.  
 Potassium Iodide, M  –Dissolve 166.00 g of potassium iodide in sufficient water to pr oduce 1000 
ml.   Potassium Iodide and Starch Solution –Dissolve 10 g of potassium iodide in sufficient water to 
produce 95 ml and add 5 ml of starch solution.  Potassium Iodide and Starch solution must be recently prepared.  
 Potassium Iodide Solution  –A 10 per cent w/v solution of potassium iodide in water.  
 Potassium Iodobismuthate Solution  –Dissolve 100 g of tartaric acid in 400 ml of water and 8.5 g 
of bismuth oxynitrate. Shake during one hour, add 200 ml of a 40 per cent w/v 
 
Potassium Iodobismuthate Solution, Dilute  –Dissolve 100 g of tartaric acid in 500 ml of water 
and add 50 ml of potassium iodobismuthate solution. 
 Potassium Mercuric- Iodide Solution –Mayer’s Reagent.  
 Add 1.36 g of mercuric chloride dissolved in 60 ml of water to a solution of 5 g of pota ssium iodide 
in 20 ml of water, mix and add suf ficient water to produce 100 ml.  
 
Potassium Mercuri c-Iodide Solution, Alkaline (Nessler’s Reagent)  
 
To 3.5 g of potassium iodide add 1.25 g of mercuric chloride dissolved in 80 ml of water, add a cold saturated solution of mercuric chloride in water, with constant stirring until a slight red 
precipitate remains. Dissolve 12 g of sodium hydroxide in the solution, add a little more of the cold saturated solution of mercuric chloride and sufficient water to pr oduce 100 ml. Allow to stand and 
decant the clear l iquid.  
   
Potassium Permanganate  – KMnO
4 = 158.03  
 Description   –Dark purple, slender, prismatic crystals, having a metallic lustre, odourless; taste, 
sweet and astringent.  
 
  328 Solubility –Soluble in water ; freely soluble in boiling water.  
 
Chloride and Sulphate –Dissolve 1 g in 50 ml of boiling water , heat on a water -bath, and add 
gradually 4 ml or a sufficient quantity of alcohol until the meniscus is colour -less; filter. A 20 ml 
portion of the filtrate complies with the limit test for chloride, Appendix 2.3.2., and another 20 ml 
portion of the filtrate complies with the limit test for  sulphates, A ppendix 2.3.7. 
 Assay –Weigh accurately about 0.8 g, dissolve in water and dilute to 250 ml. Titrate with this 
solution 25.0 ml of 0.1 N oxalic acid mixed with 25 m l of water and 5 ml of su lphuric acid. Keep 
the temperature at about 70
0 throughout the entire titration. Each ml of 0.1 N oxalic acid is 
equivalent to 0.00316 g of KMnO 4. 
 Storage –Store in well- closed containers.  
 Caution  –Great care should be observed i n handling potassium permanganate , as dange rous 
explosions are liable to occur if it is brought into contact with organic or other readily oxidisable substance, either in solution or in the dry condi tion. 
 Potassium Permanganate Solution  – A 1.0 per cent w /v solution of potassium permanganate  in 
water.  
 Potassium Permanganate, 0.1 N Solution  –158.03. 3.161 g in 1000 ml  
 Dissolve about 3.3. g of potassium permanganate  in 1000 ml of water , heat on a water -bath for one 
hour and allow to stand for two days. Fil ter through glass wool and standar dise the solution as 
follows :  
 To an accurately measured volume of about 25 ml of the solution in a glass stoppered flask add 2 g of potassium iodide followed by 10 ml of N sulphuric acid. Titrate the libe rated iodine with 
standardised 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate, adding 3 ml of starch solution as the end point is 
approached. Correct for a blank run on the same quantities of the same re agents. Each ml of 0.1 N 
sodium thiosulphate is equivalent to 0.003161 g of KMnO
4. 
 
Potass ium Tellurite: K2 TeO 3 (approx)  
General reagent grade of commerce.  
 Purified Water –H
2O = 18.02. 
 
Description   –Clear, colourless liquid, odourless, tasteless. 
 Purified water is prepareed from potable water by distillation, ion -exchange treatment, reverse 
osmosis or any other suitable process. It contains no added substances.  
 pH – Between 4.5 and 7.0 determined in a solution prepared by adding 0.3 ml of a saturated 
solution of potassium chloride to 100 ml of the liquid being examined.  
 Carbon dioxide –To 25 ml add 25 ml of calcium hydroxide solution, no turbidity is pr oduced.  
 Chloride  –To 10 ml add 1 ml of dilute nitric acid and 0.2 ml of silver nitrate solution; no 
opalescence is produced, Appendix 2.3.2.  
 Sulphate  –To 10 ml add 0.1 ml of dilute hydrochl oric acid and 0.1 ml of barium chloride , the 
solution remains clear for an hour, Appendix 2.3.6.  329 Nitrates and Nitrites – To 50 ml add 18 ml of acetic acid and 2 ml of naphthylamine -sulphanilic 
acid reagent. Add 0.12 g of zinc reducing mixture and shake several times. No pink colour develops 
within fifteen minutes.  
 
Ammonium – To 20 ml add 1 ml of alkaline potassium mercuric -iodide solution and after five 
minutes view in a Nessler cylinder placed on a white tile; the colour is not more intense than that given  on adding 1 ml of alkaline potassium mercuric -iodide solution to a solution containing 2.5 ml 
of dilute ammonium chloride solution (Nessler’s)  7.5 ml of the liquid being examined. 
 Calcium  –To 10 ml add 0.2 ml of dilute ammonia solution and 0.2 ml of ammo nium ox alate 
solution; the solution remains clear for an hour.  
 Heavy metals –Adjust the pH of 40 ml to between 3.0 and 4.0 with dilute acetic acid, add 10 ml of 
freshly prepared hydrogen sulphide solution and allow to stand for ten minutes; the colour of the solution is not more than that of a mixture of 50 ml of the liquid being exa mined and the same 
amount of dilute acetic acid added  to the sample, Appendix 2.3.3.  
 Oxidisable matter –To 100 ml add 10 ml of dilute sulphuric acid and 0.1 ml of 0.1 N potass ium 
permanganate and boil for five minutes. The solution remains faintly pink.  
 Total Solids –Not more than 0.001 per cent w/v determined on 100 ml by evaporating on a water bath and drying in an oven at 105
0 for one hour.  
 Storage –Store in tightly closed  containers. 
 Resorcinol solution  – Dissolve 1 g resublimed resorcinol in 100 ml hydrochloric acid (sp gr 1.18 
to 1.19 ).  Silver Nitrate Solution – A freshly prepared 5.0 per cent w/v solution of silver nitrate in water.  
 Silver Nitrate, 0.1 N  – AgNO
3 = 169. 87; 16.99 g in 1000 ml. Dissolve about 17 g in suf ficient 
water to produce 1000 ml and standardise the solution as follows:  
 Weigh accurately about 0.1 g of sodium chloride previously dried at 110
0 for two hours and 
dissolve in 5 ml of water . Add 5 ml of acetic acid , 50 ml of methyl alcohol  and three drops of eosin 
solution is equivalent to 1 ml of 0.1 N silver nitrate.  
 
Sodium Bicarbonate  – NaHCO 3 =84.01  
 Description   –White, crystalline powder or small, opaque, monoclinic crystals; odour less; taste, 
saline.  
 
Solubility –Freely soluble in water ; practically insoluble in alcohol. 
Carbonate  –pH of a freshly prepared 5.0 per cent w/v solution in carbon dioxide -free w ater, not 
more than 8.6.  
 Aluminium, calcium and insoluble matter –Boil 10 g with 50 ml of water and 20 ml of dilute 
ammonia solution, filter, and wash the residue with water; the residue, after ignition to constant weight, not more than 1 mg.  
 Arsenic –Not more than 2 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.1.  
  330 Iron –Dissolve 2.5 g in 20 ml of water and 4 ml of iron- free hydrochloric acid, and  dilute to 40 ml 
with water ; the solution complies with the limit test for iron, Appendix 2.3.4. 
 
Heavy metals –Not more than 5 parts per million, determined by Method A on a solution pr epared 
in the following manner:  
 Mix 4.0 g with 5 ml of water  and 10 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid, heat to boiling, and maintain 
the temperature for one minute. Add one drop of phenolphthalein solution and sufficient ammonia solution drop wise to give the solution a faint pink colour. Cool and dilute to 25 ml with water, 
Appendix 2.3.3.  
 Chlorides  –Dissolve 1.0 g in water  with the addition of 2 ml of nitric acid; the solution com plies 
with the limit test for chlorides, Appendix 2.3.2.  
 Sulphates –Dissolve 2 g in water  with the addi tion of 2 ml of hydrochloric acid; the sol ution 
complies with the limit test for sulphates, Appendix 2.3.6.  
 Ammonium compounds  –1 g warmed with 10 ml of sodium hydroxide solution does not evolve 
ammonia.  
 Assay –Weigh accurately about 1 g, dissolve in 20 ml of water, and titrate with 0.5 N su lphuric 
acid using methyl orange solutions as indicator. Each ml of 0.5 N sulphuric acid is equivalent to 
0.042 g of NaHCO
3. 
 Storage  –Store in well- closed containers.  
 Sodium Bicarbonate Solution –A 5 per cnet w/v sol ution of sodium bicarbonate in water.  
 Sodium Carbonate  – Na
2CO 3. 10H 2O =286.2.  
 Analytical reagent grade.  
 Sodium Chloride  – NaCl = 58.44 
 Analytical reagent grade.  
 Sodium Chloride Solution:  Dissolve 5 g of sodium chloride  in 50 ml of purified water.  
 Sodium Hydroxide  –NaOH = 40.00  
 Description   –White sticks, pellets, fused masses, or scales; dry, hard brittle and showing a 
crystalline fracture, very deliquescent; strongly alkaline and corrosive.  
 Solubility –Freely soluble in water  and in alcohol. 
 Aluminium, iron and matter insoluble in hydrochloric acid –Boil 5 g with 50 ml of dilute 
hydrochloric acid, cool, make alkaline with dilute ammonia solution, boil, filter, and wash with a 2.5 per cent w/v solution of ammonium nitrate; the insoluble residue af ter ignition to constant 
weight weighs not more than 5 mg.  
 Arsenic –Not more than 4 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.1.  
  331 Heavy metals –Not more than 30 parts per million, determined by Method A, Appendix 2.3.3. in a 
solution prepared by dissolving 0.67 g i n 5 ml of water and 7 ml of 3 N hydrochloric acid. Heat to 
boiling, cool and dilute to 25 ml with water. 
 Potassium –Acidify 5 ml of a 5 per cent w/v solution with acetic acid and add 3 drops of sodium 
cobaltnitrite solution; no preciptitate is formed.  
 Chloride – 0.5 g dissolved in water  with the addition of 1.8 ml of nitric acid, complies with the 
limit test for chlorides, Appendix 2.3.2.  
  
Sulphates –1 g dissolved in water with the addition of 3.5 ml of hydrochloric acid  complies with 
the limit test for sulphates, Appendix 2.3.6.  
 Assay –Weigh accurately about 1.5 g and dissolve in about 40 ml of carbon dioxide -free w ater. 
Cool and titrate with N sulphuric acid using phenolphthalein solution as indicator. When the pink 
colour of the solution is discharged, record the volume of acid solution required, add methyl orange solution and continue the titration until a persistent pink col our is produced. Each ml of N sulphuric 
acid is equivalent to 0.040 g of total alkali calculated as NaOH and each ml of acid con sumed in 
the titration with methyl orange is equiva lent to 0.106 g of Na
2CO 3.  
 Storage –Store in tightly closed containers.  Sodium Hydroxide, x N – Solutions of any normality, xN may be prepared by dissolving 40 x g of 
sodium hydroxide in water  and dilut ing to 1000 ml. 
 Sodium  Hydroxide  Solution  – A 20.0 per cent w/v solution of sodium hydroxide  in w ater. 
 
Sodium  Hydroxide  Solution , Dilute  – 
 
A 5.0 per cent w/v solution of sodium hydroxide in water.  
 
Sodium Potassium Tartrate  –Rochelle Salt COONa.CH(OH). CH(OH), COOK. 4H
2O = 282.17  
 
Contains not less than 99.0 per cent and not more than the equivalent of 104.0 per cent of C
4H4O6KNa . 4H 2O. 
 Description  –Colourless crystals or a white, crystalline powder; odourless; taste saline and cooling. 
It effloresces s lightly in warm, dry air, the crystals are often coated with a white powder.  
 Solubility –Soluble in water; practically insoluble in alcohol.  
 Acidity or Alkalinity – Dissolve 1 g in 10 ml of recently boiled and cooled water, the solution 
requires for neutr alisation not more than 0.1 ml of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide or of 0.1 N hydrochloric 
acid, using phenolphthalein solution as indic ator. 
 Iron –0.5 g complies with the limit test for iron, Appendix 2.3.4.  
 Chloride  –0.5 g complies with the limit test for chlor ides, Appendix 2.3.2.  
 Sulphate –0.5 g complies with the limit test for sulphate,  Appendix 2.3.6.  
 Assay –Weigh accurately about 2 g and heat until carbonised, cool, and boil the residue with 50 ml 
of water  and 50 ml of 0.5 N sulphuric acid; filter, and wa sh the filter with water; titrate the excess  332 of acid in the filtrate and washings with 0.5 N sodium hydroxide, using methyl orange solution as 
indicator. Each ml of 0.5 N sulphuric acid is equivalent to 0.07056 g of C 4H4O6KNa. 4H 2O. 
 
Sodium Sulphate (anhydrous) – Na 2SO 4 = 142.04 
 Analytical reagent grade of commerce.  
White, crystalline powder of granules; hygroscopic.  Sodium Thiosulphate  – Na
2S2O3. 5H 2O =248.17. 
 Description  – Large colourless crystals or coarse, crystalline powder; odourless; taste, salin e, 
deliquescent in moist air and effloresces in dry air at temperature above 33
0. 
 Solubility  – Very soluble in water ; insoluble in alcohol. 
 pH –Between 6.0 and 8.4, determined in a 10 per cent w/v solution. 
 Arsenic –Not more than 2 parts per million, Appendix 2.3.1.  
 Heavy metals  –Not more than 20 parts per million, determined by Method A, Appendix 2.3.3. in a 
solution prepared in the following manner : Dissolve 1 g in 10 ml of water, slowly add 5 ml of 
dilute hydrochloric acid and evaporate the mixture to dryness on a water -bath. Gently boil the 
residue with 15 ml of water  for two minutes, and filter. Heat the filtrate to boiling, and add 
sufficient  bromine solution to the hot filtrate to produce a clear solution and add a slight excess of 
bromine soluti on. Boil the solution to expel the bromine completely, cool to room temperature, then 
add a drop of phenolphthalein sol ution and sodium hydroxide solution until a slight pink colour is 
produced. Add 2 ml of dilute acetic acid and dilute with water to 25 ml .  
 Calcium –Dissolve 1 g in 20 ml of water,  and add a few ml of ammonium oxalate solution; no 
turbidity is produced.  
 Chloride –Dissolve 0.25 g in 15 ml of 2N nitric acid and boil gently for three to four minutes, cool 
and filter; the filtrate complies with the limit test for chlorides, Appendix 2.3.2.  Sulphate and Sulphite –Dissolve 0.25 g in 10 ml of water , to 3 ml of this solution add 2 ml of 
iodine solution, and gradually add more  iodine solution, dropwise until a very faint -persistant 
yellow colour i s procduced; the resulting solution complies with the limit test for sulphates, 
Appendix 2.3.7.  
 
Sulphide –Dissolve 1 g in 10 ml of water  and 10.00 ml of a freshly prepared 5 per cent w/v 
solution of sodium nitroprusside; the solution does not become viole t. 
 
Assay  –Weigh accurately about 0.8 g and dissolve in 30 ml of water. Titrate with 0.1 N i odine, 
using 3 ml of starch solution as indicator as the end -point is approached. Each ml of 0.1 iodine is 
equivalent to 0.02482 g of Na
2S2O3.5H 2O. 
 Storage –Store in tightly -closed containers.  
 Sodium Thiosulphate , 0.1 N  – Na
2S2O3.5H 2O. = 248.17, 24.82 g in 1000 ml. 
 Dissolve about 26 g of sodium thiosulphate and 0.2 g of sodium carbonate in carbon di oxide -free 
water and dilute to 1000 ml with the same solvent. Standardise the solution as fol lows :  
  333 Dissolve 0.300 g of potassium bromate in sufficient water  to produce 250 ml. To 50 ml of this 
solution, add 2 g of potassium iodide and 3 ml of 2 N hydrochloric acid and titrate with the sodium -
thiosulphate solution using  starch solution, added towards the end of the titration, as indicator until 
the blue colour is discharged. Each 0.002784 g of potassium bromate is equivalent to 1 ml of 0.1 N 
sodium thiosulphate. Note: –Re -standardise 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate frequently . 
 
Soxhlet Modification of Fehling’s solution  – Prepare by mixing equal volumes of Solution A and 
Solution B immediately before using.  
 Copper Sulphate Solution (Solution A)  – Dissolve 34.639 g of copper sulphate crystals  
(CuSO
4.5H 2O)in water, dilute to 500ml and filter through glass wool or filter paper.  
 Potassium Sodium Tartrate (Rochelle Salt) Solution (Solution B)  – Dissolve 173 g of potassium 
sodium tartrate and 50 g of sodium hydroxide in water, dilute to 500 ml. Let the solution stand for a day and f ilter. 
 Standard Invert Sugar Solution – Weigh accurately 0.95 g sucrose and dissolve it in 500 ml 
water. Add 2 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid, boil gently for 30 minutes and keep aside for 24 hours. Neutralize with sodium carbonate and make the fina l volume to 1000 ml; 50 ml of this 
solution contains 0.05 g invert sugar.  
 Stannous Chloride  – SnCl
2. 2H 2O =225.63. 
 Contains not less than 97.0 per cent of SnCl
2. 2H 2O. 
 Description   –Colourless crystals.  
 Solubility –Soluble in dilute hydrochloric acid.  
 Arsenic-  Dissolve 5.0 g in 10 ml of hydrochloric acid, heat to boiling and allow to stand for one 
hour; the solution shows no darkening when compared with a freshly prepared solution of 5.0 g in 10 ml of hydrochloric acid.  Sulphate –5.0 g with the additi on of 2 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid, complies with the limit test 
for sulphates, Appendix 2.3.7.  Assay –Weigh accurately about 1.0 g and dissolve in 30 ml of hydrochloric acid in a sto ppered 
flask. Add 20 ml of water  and 5 ml of chloroform and titrate rapidly with 0.05 M potassium iodate 
until the chloroform layer is colourless. Each ml of 0.05 M pota ssium iodate is equivalent to 
0.02256 g of SnCl
2. 2H 2O. 
 Stannous Chloride Solution – May be prepared by either of the two methods given b elow :  
Dissolve 330 g of stannous  chloride in 100 ml of hydrochloric acid and add sufficient water  to 
produce 1000 ml.  
 Dilute 60 ml of hydrochloric acid with 20 ml of water , add 20 g of tin and heat gently until gas 
ceases to be evolved; add sufficient water to produce 100 ml, allowing the undissolved tin to 
remain in the solution.  Starch Soluble  – Starch, which has been treated with hydrochloric acid until after being washed, it 
forms an almost clear liquid solution in hot water.  
 
Description   –Fine, white powder.   334 Solubi lity –Soluble in hot water, usually forming a slightly turbid solution . 
 
Acidity or Alkalinity –Shake 2 g with 20 ml of water  for three minutes and filter; the filtrate is not 
alkaline or more than fainthy acid to litmus paper.  
 Sensitivity  –Mix 1 g with a  little cold water  and add 200 ml boiling water. Add 5 ml of this 
solution to 100 ml of water  and add 0.05 ml of 0.1 N  iodine. The deep blue colour is discharged by 
0.05 ml of 0.1 N  sodium thiosulphate.  
 Ash – Not more than 0.3 per cent, Appendix 2.3. 
 Starch Solution –Triturate 0.5 g of soluble starch, with 5 ml of water,  and add this, with constant 
stirring, to sufficient water to produce about 100 ml. Boil for a few minutes, cool, and filter.  
 Solution of starch must be recently prepared . 
 Sulphamic Acid  –NH
2SO 3H =97.09. 
 Contains not less than 98.0 per cent of H
3NO 3S. 
 Description    -White crystals or a white crystalline powder.  
 Solubility  –Readily soluble in water. Melting Range –203
0 to 2050, with decomposition. 
 Sulphuric Acid – H
2SO 4 = 98.08.  
 When  no molarity is indicated use analytical reagent grade of commerce containing about 98 per 
cent w/w of sulphuric acid. An oily, corrosive liquid weighing about 1.84 g per ml and about 18 M in strength.  
 When solutions of molarity xM are required, they should be prepared by carefully adding 54 ml of sulphuric acid to an equal volume of water and diluting with water to 1000 ml.   
Solutions of sulphuric acid contain about 10 per cent w/v of H
2SO 4 per g mol. 
 Sulphuric Acid, Dilute  –Contains approximately 10 pe r cent w/w of H
2SO 4. 
 Dilute 57 ml of sulphuric acid to 1000 ml with water.  
 Sulphuric Acid, Chlorine -free –Sulphuric acid which complies with the following addi tional test: 
 Chloride –Mix 2 ml with 50 ml of water and add 1 ml of solution of silver nitrate , no opalescence 
is produced.  
 Sulphuric Acid, Nitrogen -free- Sulphuric acid which contains not less than 98.0 per cent w/w of 
H
2SO 4 and complies with the following additional test :  
 Nitrate –Mix 45 ml with 5 ml of water , cool and add 8 mg of diphenyl benezidine;  the s olution is 
colourless or not more than very pale blue.  
 Sulphuric acid + orthophosphoric acid mixture  – take 60 ml water, add 15 ml conc. sulphuric 
acid  and 15 ml H
3PO 4 cool and dilute to 1000 ml.  
  335 Tartaric Acid  – (CHOH. COOH) 2 =150.1 
 
Analy tical reagent grade.  
 Thioglycollic Acid  – Mercapto acetic acid, – HS. CH
2COOH =92.11. 
 Contains not less than 89.0 per cent w/w of C
2H4O2S, as determined by both parts of the Assay 
described below :  
 Description  –Colourless or nearly colourless liquid; odour strong and uplea sant. 
 Iron  –Mix 0.1 ml with 50 ml of water and render alkaline with strong ammonia solution; no pink 
colour is produced.  
 Assay  – Weigh accurately about 0.4 g and dissolve in 20 ml of water and titrate with 0.1 N sodium 
hydroxide using cresol red solution as indicator. Each ml of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide is equivalent 
to 0.009212 g of C
2H4O2S. 
 To the above neutralised solution and 2 g of sodium bicarbonate and titrate with 0.1 N iodine . Each 
ml of 0.1 N iodine is equivalent to 0.009212 g of  C
2H4O2S. 
 
Triethanolamine 20per cent Solution  – 200 ml of triethanolamine, adds 800 ml water and make 
up to 1000 ml.  
 Toluene - Methyl benzene,C
6H5.CH 3 =102.14. 
 Analytical grade reagent of commerce.  
Clear, colourless liquid, odour, characteristic; bp about 110
0, wt per ml, about 0.870 g.  
 
Water –See purified water.  
 Water, Ammonia- free –Water, which has been boiled vigorously for a few minutes and protected 
from the atomosphere during cooling and storage.  
 Xylenol Orange  – [3H-2,1-Benzoxathiol –3-yliden e bis – (6-hydroxy -5-methyl -m-phenylene) 
methylenenitrilo] tetra acetic acid SS -dioxide or its tetra s odium salt.  
 Gives a reddish -purple colour with mercury, lead, zinc and contain other metal ions in acid 
solution. When metal ions are absent, for example , in the presence of an excess of dis odium 
ethylenediamine tetraacetate , this solution is yellow. 
 Xylenol Orange Solution  –Dissolve 0.1 g of xylenol orange with 100 ml of water and filter, if 
necessary.  
 Zinc  Acetate – analytical grade reagent of commerce.  
 Zinc Acetate – Aluminum Chloride Reagent:  Dissolve 20 g of zinc acetate and 5 g of aluminum 
chloride  in sufficient water to make 100 ml.  
 Zinc acetate solution 0.05M  - Dissolve 10.9690 g of z inc acetate  in 50 ml purified water and few 
drops of  glacial  acetic acid  and dilute to 1000 ml. 
 
  336 APPENDIX-  5 
 
5.1. CHEMICAL TESTS AND ASSAYS  
 
5.1.1. -  ESTIMATION OF TOTAL PHENOLICS  
 
Prepare a stock solution (1 mg/ml) of the extract in methanol . From the stock solution, take 
suitable quantity of the extract into 2 5-ml volumetric flask and add 10 ml of water and 1.5 ml of 
Folin Ciocalteau reagent . Keep the mixture for 5 min, and then add 4 ml of 20 per cent sodium 
carbonate solution and make up to 25 ml with double distilled water.  
 
Keep the mixture for 30 min and record absorbance at 765 nm. Calculate percentage of total 
phenolics from calibration curve of gallic acid prepared by using the above procedure and express total phenolics as percentage of gallic acid.  
 
5.1.2. -  ESTIMATION OF TOTAL TANNINS
 
 
Defat 2 g of s ample with 25 ml petroleum ether  for 12 h. Boil the marc for 2 h with 300 ml 
of double distilled water . Cool, dilute up to 500 ml and filter. Measure 25 ml of this infusion into 2 -
litre porcelain dish; add 20 ml Indigo solution and 750 ml double distilled water . Titrate it with 
0.1N potassium permanganate solution, 1 ml at a time, until blue solution changes to green. Thereafter add drops wise until solution becomes golden yellow in colour.  
 Similarly, titrate mixture of 20 -ml Indigo solution and 750 ml of  double distilled water . 
Calculate the difference between two titrations in ml.  
 Each ml of 0.1N potassium permanganate solution is equivalent to 0.004157 g of total 
tannins.  
5.1.3. -  ESTIMATION OF SUGARS  
 
Method A:  
Estimate total soluble and reducing s ugars according to Nelson – Somogyi photometric 
method for the determination of glucose.  
 Preparation of calibration curve for d- glucose (Dextrose)  
 
Dissolve accurately weighed 500 mg of dextrose in a 100- ml volumetric flask (5 mg / ml). 
From the above st ock solution pipette out aliquots of 0.05 ml to 0.3 ml in to 10-  ml volumetric flask 
and makeup the volume with double distilled water . Add 1 ml of alkaline reagent to each tube (25 
parts of Reagent I + 1 part of Reagent II).  
 
Reagent I:  Dissolve 25 g of anhydrous sodium carbonate 25 g of Rochelle salt or sodium 
potassium tartrate, 20 g of sodium bicarbonate  and 200 g of anhydrous sodium sulphate  in about 
800 ml of water and dilute to 1 L.  
 
Reagent II  : Add 15 per cent copper sulphate  containing concentrated sulphuric acid per 100 ml to 
the tube. Mix the contents and heat for 20 min in a boiling water -bath. Then cool the tubes and add 
the solution 1 ml of arsenomolybdic acid reagent  (dissolve 250 mg of ammonium molybdate  in 45 
ml of purified water . To this , add 2.1 ml of concentrated sulphuric acid
 and mix well. To this 
solution, dissolve 3 g of sodium arsenate  in 25 ml of  purified water , mix well and place in 
incubator maintained at 37 º C for 24 hr). Dilute the contents of the test tube to 10 ml by adding 
purified water  mix well and then read color intensity at 520 nm using a ultra violet visible  337 spectrophotometer. Record the absorbance and plot a standard curve of absorbance vs.  
concentration.  
 
5.1.3.1. -  Reducing sugars  
 
For reducing sugars, weigh accur ately 500 mg of the sample, dissolve in 100 ml of double 
distilled water  and make up the volume to 100 ml in a volumetric flask. Then follow method as 
mentioned for the preparation of calibration curve. 
 
5.1.3.2. -  Total sugars  
 
Place 25 ml of the solution from the 100 ml stock solution prepared for the reducing sugars 
in a 100 ml beaker. To this, add 5 ml of hydrochloric acid: purified water  (1:1 v/v), mix well and 
allow to stand at room temperature for 24 hr for inversion. Neutralize the sample with 5 N s odium 
hydroxide  and make up to 50 ml with purified water . From this diluted sample, use 1 ml of aliquot 
for the estimation of total soluble sugars using the method described in preparation of calibration 
curve for dextrose.  
 
5.1.3.3. -  Non - reducing sugars  
 
Non-reducing sugars are determined by subtracting the content of reducing sugars from the 
amount of total sugars.  
 
Preparation of reagent:  
 Fehling’s solution : 
 A) Dissolve 69.278 g of copper  sulphate  in water and make the volume up to 1 liter. 
 B) Disso lve 100 g of sodium hydroxide  and 340 g sodium potassium tartarate  in purified water and 
make the volume to 1 liter.  
 Mix equal volumes of A and B before the experiment.  Clarifying reagent : 
 Solution 1: Dissolve 21.9 g of zinc acetate  and 3 ml of glacial acetic acid  in purified water and 
make the volume to 100 ml.  Solution II: Dissolve 10.6 g of potassium ferrocyanide  in water and make up to 100 ml.  
 Reducing sugars : Take suitable amount of the sample and neutralize with sodium hydroxide 
solution (10per c ent in water). Evaporate the neutralized solution to half the volume on a water bath 
at 50
0 to remove the alcohol. Cool the solution add 10 ml of the clarifying solution I followed by 10 
ml of the clarifying solution II. Mix, filter through a dry filter pa per and make up the volume to 100 
ml. Take 10 ml of the Fehling’s solution and from a burette and add sugar solution (above prepared 
sample) in a drop wise manner and heat to boiling over the hot plate (maintained at 800) until the 
mixture of Copper ( Fehli ng’s solution) appears to be nearly reduced. Add 3 -5 drops of 1per cent 
methylene blue and continue the titration till the blue colour is discharged. Note down the readings 
and calculate the percentage of glucose.  
 Non-reducing sugars : Take suitable amount  of the sample and neutralize with sodium hydroxide 
solution (10per cent in water). Evaporate the neutralized solution to half the volume on a water bath  338 at 500C to remove the alcohol. Cool the solution add 10 ml of the clarifying solution I followed by 
10 ml of the clarifying solution II. Mix, filter through a dry filter paper. To the Filter add 15 ml of 
0.1 N hydrochloric acid. Cover with stopper and heat to boiling for two minutes. Add 
phenolpthlein and neutralize with sodium hydroxide  solution (10per ce nt). Transfer to 100 ml 
volumetric flask and make the volume to 100 ml and perform the titration as done for the reducing sugars. Calculate the percentage of the total sugars. Subtract the percentage of the reducing sugars from the sugars to obtain non reducing sugars.  
 5.1.4. FIEHE’S TEST  
 Reagents  
Resorcinol solution – Dissolve 1 g resublimed resorcinol in 100 ml hydrochloric acid ( sp gr 1.18 to 1.19 ). Ether – sulphuric ether.  
 Procedure  – Transfer about 5 g of the honey sample into a mortar, using a pa stle, mix the honey 
with 10 ml of ether. Decant the ether extract into a porcelain dish. Repeat the extraction twice in the same manner and collect the extract in the same dish. Allow the extracts to evaporate to dryness at room temperature and add a large  drop of freshly prepared  resorcinol solution. The production of 
cherry red colour appearing instantly indicates a positive reaction. Faint pink colour disappearing after a short time or yellow to salmon pink colours indicate a negative reaction. 
 
5.1.5. A NILINE CHLORIDE TEST  
 
Reagent  
Aniline chloride solution – To 100 ml of aniline, add 30 ml of hydrochloric acid. (10:3).  
 
Procedure  – Place 5 g of the sample in a porcelain dish and add, while stirring, 2.5 ml of recently 
prepared aniline chloride solution. In the presence of commercial invert sugar within one minute, the reagent assumes orange red colour turning dark red. Yellow to salmon shades have no significance.  
 5.1.6. DETERMINATION OF SULPHUR DIOXIDE  
 
Sulphur dioxide is determined by the modified M onier -William’s Method – 
The apparatus as assembled is shown below  
 
                                   Assembly for determination of Sulphur dioxide  
  339 Reagents  
 
(a) Sodium Carbonate Solution-  10 percent (m/v). aqueous  
(b) Bromophenol Blue Indicator  – Dissolve 0.1 g of bromophenol blue in 3.0 ml of 0.05 N 
sodium hydroxide solution and 5 ml of ethyl alcohol (90 percent by volume) by gently warming. 
Make up the volume of the solution with ethyl alcohol (20 percent v/v) to 250 ml in a volumetric flask.  
(c) Hydrogen peroxide solution  - Dilute a 30 percent (m/v) hydrogen peroxide solution with about 
twice its volume of water and neutralize the free sulphuric acid that may be present in the hydrogen 
peroxide solution with barium hydroxide solution, using bromophe nol blue indicator solution. 
Allow the precipitate of barium sulphate to settle, and filter. Determine the concentration of hydrogen peroxide in the filtrate by titrating with standard potassium permanganate solution. Dilute the filtrate with cold water so  as to obtain a 3 percent (m/v) solution of hydrogen peroxide.  
(d) Concentrated Hydrochloric acid  - sp.gr. 1.16 
 (e) Carbon dioxide gas  - from a cylinder.  
 (f) Standard sodium hydroxide solution -0.1 N, standardized at the time of the experiment using 
brom ophenol blue indicator solution.  
 Procedure  
Assemble the apparatus as shown above. Introduce into the flask C, 300 ml of water and 20 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid through the dropping funnel E. Run a steady current of cold water through the condens er F. Boil the mixture contained in the flask G for a short time to expel the air 
from the system in current of carbon dioxide gas previously passed through the wash bottle A. Weigh accurately about 100 g of the material and mix with the minimum quantity o f water so as to 
make the diluted material easily flow down to the dropping funnel. Introduce the diluted material into the flask C through the dropping funnel E. Wash the dropping funnel with a small quantity of water and run the washing into the flask C. Again boil the mixture contained in the flask C in a 
slow current of carbon dioxide gas   (passed previously through the wash bottle A) for one hour. Just before the end of the distillation, stop the flow of water in the condenser. (This causes the condenser to become hot and drives over residual traces of sulphur dioxide retained in the condenser.) When the delivery tube H, just above the Erlenmeyer flask j, becomes hot to touch, remove the stopper J immediately. Wash the delivery tube H and the contents of the Peligot tube L with water into Erlenmeyer flask. Cool the contents of the Erlenmeyer flask to room temperature, add a few drops of bromophenol blue indicator and titrate with standard sodium hydroxide solution. (Bromophenol blue is unaffected by car bon dioxide and gives a distinct change of color in cold 
hydrogen peroxide solution).  Carry out a blank determination using 20 ml of Conc,. Hydrochloric acid diluted with 300 ml of 
water.  
 Calculation  
 
Sulphur dioxide, mg/kg = 0 .032000 (V -v) x1000x1000xN
 
                                                                   W  
Where 
V = volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution required for the test with the material  
v = volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution required for the blank determi nation;  
N = normality of standard sodium hydroxide solution; and W = weight in g of the material taken for the test  
  340 5.1.7. DETERMINATION OF TOTAL REDUCING SUGARS, SUCROSE AND FRUCTOSE           
– GLUCOSE RATIO  
 TOTAL REDUCING SUGARS  
 Reagents  
 
Soxhlet Mod ification of Fehling’s solution  – Prepare by mixing equal volumes of S olution A and 
Solution B immediately before using.  
 
Copper sulphate solution (Solution A)  – Dissolve 34.639 g of copper sulphate crystals   
(CuSO
4.5H 2O)in water, dilute to 500ml and filte r through glass wool or filter paper.  
 Standardization of copper sulphate solution – Using separate pipettes, pipette accurately 5 ml of 
Solution A and 5 ml of Solution B into a conical flask of 250 ml capacity. Hea t this mixture to 
boiling on an asbestos gauze and add standard invert sugar solution from a burette, about one 
millilitre less than the expected volume which will reduce the Fehling’s solution completely  48 ml . 
Add one ml of methylene blue indicator while keeping the solution boiling. Complete t he titration 
within three minute , the end point being indicated by change of colour from blue to red. From the 
volume of invert sugar solution used, calculate the strength(s) of the copper sulphate solution by multiplying the titre value by 0.001 (mg/ml of  the standard invert sugar solution). This would give 
the quantity of invert sugar required to reduce the copper in 5 ml copper sulphate solution.  Potassium Sodium Tartrate (Rochelle Salt)Solution (Solution B)  – Dissolve 173 g of potassium 
sodium tartrate  and 50 g of sodium hydroxide in water, dilute to 500 ml. Let the solution stand for a 
day and filter.  
 Hydrochloric acid  – Sp gr 1.18 at 20 
0C (approximately 12 N).  
 
Standard Invert Sugar Solution – Weigh accurately 0.95 g sucrose and dissolve it in 500 m l 
water. Add 2 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid, boil gently for 30 minutes and keep aside for 24 
hours. Neutralize with sodium carbonate and make the final volume to 1000 ml; 50 ml of this solution contains 0.05 g invert sugar.  
 Methylene Blue Indicat or – 0.02 per cent in water.  
 Procedure  – Place accurately weighed about one gram ( W) of the prepared sample of honey into a 
250 ml volumetric flask and dilute with about 150 ml of water. Mix thoroughly the contents of the flask and make the volume to 250 ml with water. Using separate pipettes, take accurately  5 ml of 
each of Solution A and Solution B, in a porcelain dish. Add about 12 ml of honey solution from a burette and heat to boiling over an asbestos gauze. Add 1 ml of methylene blue indicator and while keeping the solution boiling complete the titration, within three minutes, the end point being indicated by change of colour from blue to red. Note the volume (H) in ml of honey solution required for the titration.  
 
Calcul ation  
 
Toatl reducing sugars,  per cent by mass = 250 x 100  x S
 
                                                                       H x M  
Where 
S = strength of copper sulphate solution, H = volume in ml of honey solution required for titration, and 
M = mass in g of honey.   341 SUCROSE   
 
Procedure – To 100 ml of the stock honey solution, add one ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid 
and heat the solution to near boiling. Keep aside overnight. Neutralize this inverted honey solution 
with sodium carbonate and determine the total reducing sugars as described as above.  
 
Calcu lation 
 
Sucrose, per cent by mass = [ (reducing  sugars after inversion, per cent by mass) – (reducing sugars 
before inver sion, per cent by mass)] x 0.95 
 
FRUCTOSE – GLUCOSE RATIO  
 
Reagents  
 
Iodine Solution – 0.05 N. 
 Sodium hydroxide solution – 0.1 N.  Sulphuric Acid – concentrated.  
 Standard Sodium Thiosulphate Solution – 0.05 N.  Procedure – Pipette 50 ml of honey solution in a 250 ml stoppered flask. Add 40 ml of iodine 
solution and 25 ml of sodium hydroxide solution. Stopper the flask and keep in dark for 20 minutes. Acidify with 5 ml of sulphuric acid and titrate quickly the excess of iodine against standard sodium thiosuphate solution. Conduct a blank using 50 ml of water instead of honey 
solution.  
 
Calcu lations  
 
Approxi mately glucose,  
Per cent by mass ( w) = (B – S) x 0.004502 x 100
 
                                                          a                                
where  
 B = volume of sodium thiosulphate solution required for the blank,  
S = volume of sodium thiosulphate solution required for the sample, and  
a = mass of honey taken for test.  Approximate  
Fructose, per cent  
By mass ( x)            = Approximate total reducing sugars, per cent – w
 
                                                           0.925  True g lucose, per cent by mass ( y) = w  – 0.012 x  
True fructose,  
 Per cent by  
   mass  ( z)     = Approximate  reducing sugars, per cent –  y
 
                                              0.925  True reducing sugars, per cent by mass = y +z 
  342 Fructose – glucose rati o = True fructose, per cent by mass ( z) 
                                           True glucose, per cent by mass ( y)   
   
5.2.- ESTIMATION OF CURCUMIN BY TLC DENSITOMETER  
 
Sample solution -  Extract 5 g of avaleha with methanol  (25 ml x 4), filter, pool, c oncentrate and 
make up the volume to 25 ml with methanol.  
 Standard solution - Prepare a s 0tock solution of curcumin  (160 µg/ml) by dissolving 4 mg of 
accurately weighed curcumin in methanol and making up the volume to 25 ml with methanol. Transfer the al iquots (0.4 – 1.4 ml) of stock solution to 10 ml volumetric flasks and make up the 
volume with methanol to obtain standard solutions containing 6.4 to 22.4 µg/ml curcumin, respectively.  
 
Calibration curve  -  Apply 10 µl of th e standard solutions (64 to 224 ng) on a precoated TLC plate 
of uniform thickness. Develop the plate in the solvent system  toluene: ethyl acetate: methanol  (5 : 
0.5 : 1) to a distance of 10 cm. Scan the plate densitometrically at 429 nm. Record the peak ar ea 
and prepare the calibration curve by plotting peak area vs concentration of curcumin applied.  
 
Estimation of curcumin in the drug -  Apply 5 µl of the test solution on a precoated silica gel 60 
F
254 TLC plate. Develop the p late in the solvent system toluene: ethyl acetate: methanol  (5: 0.5: 1) 
and record the chromatogram as described above for the calibration curve. Calculate the amount of 
curcumin  present in the sample from the calibration curve of curcumin.  
 5.2.1. - Determ ination of Alumin ium 
 Solutions  
 
10 per cent sodium hydroxide  solution  – Dissolve 10 g sodium hydroxide  in 100 ml purified 
water.  
 
EDTA solution 0.05 M  – Dissolve 18.6120 g of sodium salt of EDTA in purified water and make 
up to 1000 ml.  
 Zinc acetate sol ution 0.05M  - Dissolve 10.9690 g of z inc acetate  in 50 ml purified water and few 
drops of  glacial acetic acid  and dilute to 1000 ml. 
 Acetate buffer 5.5 pH  – Dissolve 21.5 g of sodium acetate  (AR) in 300 ml purified water  
containing 2 ml glacial acetic ac id and dilute to 1000 ml  
 Xylenol orange indicator  –Dissolve 0.2 g of xylenol orange indicator  in 100 ml purified water  
with 2 ml acetic acid . 
 
Procedure  
 
Take suitable aliquot from the stock solution in 250 ml beaker. Take 50 ml of 10 per cent 
sodium hydroxide  solution in another beaker. Neutralize the aliquot with sodium hydroxide  
solution. Transfer the 10 per cent sodium hydroxide  solution to aliquot with constant stirring. Add a 
pinch of sodium carbonate  into the solution. Boil the content on burner. C ool and filter through 
Whatman 40 No. filter paper with pulp in 600 ml beaker. Wash the precipitate with hot water 6- 8 
times. Acidify the filtrate with dil. hydrochloric acid and adjust pH 5.5. Add, in excess normally 25 
ml 0.05M EDTA solution. Add 25 ml acetate buffer solution . Boil the solution; cool and again 
adjust pH 5 –  5.5. Add 5- 6 drops of xylenol orange indicator . The colour changes from golden  343 yellow to orange red at the end point. Take 25 m l0.05 M EDTA solution and run a blank. Each of 
1M EDTA i s equivalent to 0.05098 g of Al 2O3. 
                   
5.2.2. -  Determination of Borax  
 
Powder 5- 6 g of drug and incinerated at 4500 for 3 hours to get it ash. Dissolve the ash in 20 
ml. of purified  water  and left for 15 minutes, filter, wash the residue w ith 80 ml of purified  water 
for 4 -5 washings. If necessary, shake the contents and titrate with 0.5N hydrochloric acid using 
solution of m ethyl orange  as an indicator. Each ml of 0.5N hydrochloric acid is equivalent to 
0.09536 g of Na 2 B4O7.10H 2O. 
 
5.2.3. -  Determination of Calcium  
 Solution s 
  
20 per cent P otassium hydroxide solution  – Dissolve 200 g potassium hydroxide  in purified  
water and make up to 1000 ml. 
Ammonia buffer solutions 9.5 pH  – Dissolve 67.5 g ammonium chloride  in 300 ml purified 
water , add 570 ml ammonia solution and dilute to 1000 ml. 
 
EDTA (Ethylene Diethyl Tetra Acetic acid) solution 0.05 M  – Dissolve 18.6120 g of solution 
salt of EDTA and in water and make up to 1000 ml. 
 Triethanolamine 20per cent Solution  – 200 ml of triethanolamine, adds 800 ml water and make 
up to 1000 ml.  
 Eriochrome Black T indicator 0.1per cent solution  – Dissolve 0.10 g indicator in 100 ml of 
Methanol.  Patterns & Reeders indicators 0.1per cent  solution  – Dissolve 0.01g indicator in 100 ml of 
Methanol.  
Procedure  
 
Take one part of filtrate reserved from Iron (Fe) estimation. Add 5 ml Triethanolamine 20  
per cent solution. Add a pinch of Hydroxylamine hydrochloride . Add 25- 30 ml potassium 
hydroxide  20 per cent solution. Add 4- 5 drops of Patterns and Reeders indicat or, which imparts 
rose red colour. Titrate the solution against standard EDTA solution. The colour changes from rose 
red to Prussian blue mark end point.  
 
 Each ml of 1M EDTA solution is equivalent to 0.04008 g Calcium.  
                         
5.2.4. -  Determination of Copper (Cu) 
 
Solutions  
 Standard 0.1 N sodium thiosulphate solutions   
 Potassium iodide . 
 Starch 1per cent solution  – Dissolve 1 g in water, boil and make up 100 ml.  
 
  344 Procedure  
 
Take suitable aliquot from the stock solution in a beaker. Add  approx. 1.0 g sodium 
fluoride. Add ammonia solution and precipitate solution. Add acetic acid  to dissolve the 
precipitate. Boil and cool in water bath. Add approx 1.0 g potassium iodide . Titrate the liberated 
iodine against 0.1 N sodium thoisulphate  (hypo ) solutions by adding starch solution as indicator. 
The liberated iodine colour blackish brown changes to white at the end point. Calculate copper 
value against 1 ml of hypo solution titrating against standard 1000 ppm copper solution.   Each ml of 1N Na
2S2O3 solution is equivalent to 0.06357 g of Copper  
 
5.2.5. -  Determination of Iron (Fe)  
 
Preparation of sample solution  
 
Ignite a suitable quantity of the sample (in the presence of organic matter) in a crucible in a 
muffle furnace at 500 -5500 until the re sidue is free from organic matter. Moisten with 5 -10 ml of 
hydrochloric acid, boil for two min, add 30 ml of water, heat on the water bath for few min, filter 
and wash thoroughly the residue with water and make up to volume in a volumentric flask.  
 Solutio ns  
 Stannous chloride solution – Dissolve 5 g stannous chloride (A.R) in 25 ml Conc. hydrochloric 
acid  and dilute to 100 ml (5 per cent solution). 
 Mercuric chloride – saturated solution in water.  
 Sulphuric acid + orthophosphoric acid mixture  – take 60 ml water, add 15 ml conc. sulphuric 
acid  and 15 ml H
3PO 4 cool and dilute to 1000ml.  
 Diphenylamine barium sulphonate  – Dissolve 0.25 g in 100 ml water.  
 0.1 N S tandard potassium dichromate solution  - Dissolve 4.9035 g AR grade in water and dilute 
to 1000 ml.  
 
Procedure  
 
Take /withdraw a suitable aliquot from the stock solution in 250 ml in duplicate. Dilute to 
about 100 ml with distilled water. Add 1- 2 drops of methyl red  indicator. Add 1- 2 g ammonium 
chloride . Add dil. Ammonium solution till brown precipi tate appears. Boil the solution with ppt. for 
4-5 minutes. Cool the content and filter through Whatman 41 no. filter paper. Wash the residue 
with hot water 4 -6 times. Dissolve the residue in dil. HCl in 250 ml beaker. Wash with hot water 
and make the volum e to 100 ml approx. Boil the solution on burner. Reduce the Fe
3+ to Fe2+ by 
adding stannous chloride  solution drop wise till solution becomes colourless. 
 
Add 1- 2 drops of stannous chloride solution  in excess. Cool the content in water. Add 10-
15 ml 10per cent solution of m ercuric chloride. Add 25 ml acid mixture. Add 2- 3 drops of 
diphenylamine barium sulphonate indicator . Add distilled water, if required. Titrate against 
standard potassium dichromate solution. Appearance of violet colour show end point. 
Each ml of 1N K 2Cr2O7 solution is equivalent to 0.05585 g Iron  
Each ml of 1N K 2Cr2O7  solution is equivalent to 0.7985 g Fe 2O3 
 
  345 5.2.6. -  Determination of Magnesium  
 
Take another part of filtrate reserved from Fe estimation. Add 5 ml t riethanolamine 20 per 
cent solution. Add a pinch of hydroxylamine hydrochloride . Add 25- 30 ml ammonia buffer 9.5 pH . 
Add 4- 5 drops of eriochrome black T indicator. The colour changes from rose red to blue marks the 
end point.  
 
Each ml of 1M EDTA solution is equivalent to 0.0409 g of MgO.  
 
5.2.7. -  Determination of Mercury  
 
Powder 0.5 g drug and treat with 7 ml of conc. nitric acid  and 15 ml of conc. sulphuric acid 
in a kjeldahl flask; heat under reflux gently at first then strongly for 30 minutes. Cool and add 50 
ml conc. nitric  acid  boil so as to remove the brown fumes. Continue the addition of nitric acid  and 
boiling until the liquid is colourless; cool, wash the condenser with 100 ml of water, remove the flask and add 1.0 per cent potassium permangnate  solution drop wise until  pink colour persists. 
Decolourize it by adding 6.0 per cent hydrogen peroxide  drop wise to remove excess of potassium 
permangnate  followed by 3.0 ml of conc. nitric acid  and titrate with 0.1N ammonium thiocyanate 
solutions  using ferric alum  as indicator.  
 
Each ml. of 0.1N NH
4SCN  solution is equivalent to 0.01003 g Mercury.  
 
5.2.8. -  Determination of Silica (SiO 2) 
 
Weigh 0.5 g (in case of high silica) or 1.0 g (low silica) finely powdered and dried sample 
in a platinum crucible (W 1). Add 4- 5 g anhydrous sodium carbonate  into the crucible. Mix 
thoroughly and cover the crucible with lid, if necessary. Place the crucible in muffle furnace. Allow 
the temperature to rise gradually to reach 900 -9500 and keep on this temp. for about ½ hour to 
complete the fusion. T ake out the crucible and allow cool at room temperature. Extract the cooled 
mass in 25- 30 ml dil hydrochloric acid in 250 ml beaker. Heat on hot plate/burner to dissolve the 
contents. Wash the crucible with distilled water. Keep the beaker on water bath and allow dry the mass. Dehydrate back and powder the mass. Take out the beaker and allow cooling at room temperature. Add 25- 30 ml hydrochloric acid dilute to 100 ml distilled water. Boil the content and 
allow cool. Filter through Whatman no 40. filter pape r. Wash the residue with hot water 6- 8 times. 
Place the residue along with filter paper in platinum crucible. Ignite at 900 -950
0 for 2 -3 min. Allow 
to cool and weigh as SiO 2.  
           
5.2.9. -  Estimation of Sodium and Potassium by Flame Photometer  
 
Prep aration of Standard S olutions  
 
 Weigh 2.542 g of AR sodium chloride  and dissolve in purified water  and make upto 1000 
ml in a volumetric flask. Dilute 1  ml of the stock solution to 100 ml. This gives standard of 1mg of 
sodium per 100 ml (10  ppm). Prepare 20, 30, 40 and 50 ppm standard solution. 
Weigh 1.9115g of AR potassium chloride  and dissolve in purified water  and make up to 
1000 ml in a volumetric flask. Dilute 1ml of the stock solution to 100ml. This gives standard of 
1mg of sodium per 100 ml (10  ppm). Prepare 20, 30, 40 and 50 ppm standard solution. 
 
Preparation of Sample Solution  
  Weigh 10 g of sample in a preweighed silica dish and heat in a muffle furnace for 1hr at 
600º. Cool and dissolve the ash in purified water and make up to 100 ml in a volume tric flask.   
  346 Switch on the instrument first and then the pump. Keep distilled water for aspiration and 
allow it to stand for 15 min (warming time). Open the glass cylinder and ignite the flame. Adjust 
the instrument to zero. 
 
Introduce the maximum concent ration solution and adjust it to 100. Again introduce the 
purified water so that instrument shows zero. Then introduce the standard solution in ascending concentration. Note down the reading each time. Introduce the purified water for aspiration in between  the standard solutions. Introduce the sample solution and if it is within the range take the 
reading. If it exceeds limit 100 then dilute the solution till the reading is within the range. Plot the curve with concentration in ppm against reading obtained. Find out the concentration of the sample 
solution. Take two or three readings and find out the average. Find out the concentration of sodium and potassium. 
 
5.2.10. -  Determination of Sodium Chloride  
 
Dissolve about 2- 3g accurately weighed drug in 25 ml of purified water  and left for 30 
minutes, filter. Wash the filter paper completely with purified  water  and the filtrate is made 100 ml 
in volumetric flask, make the solution homogeneous, titrate 25 ml of this solution with 0.1 N silver nitrate solution  using potassium chromate  as indicator. The end point shows the light brick red 
colour.  
  Each ml. of 0.1 N Ag NO
3 solution is equivalent to 0.005845 g of NaCl.  
 5.2.11. -  Determination of Sulphur  
 Solution  
 Carbon tetrachloride saturated with  Bromine  
 
Bariu m chloride – 10 per cent solution in water.  
 
Procedure  
 
Take 0.5 – 1 g powdered sample in 250 ml beaker. Add 10 ml carbon tetrachloride 
saturated with bromine. Keep in cold condition in fume chamber over night. Add 10 – 15 ml conc . 
nitric acid . Digest on w ater bath. Add 10 ml conc. hydrochloric acid, digest it to expel nitrate  
fumes till syrupy mass. Cool and extract with hydrochloric acid, make volume to 100 ml. Boil and 
filter through Whatman No 40. filter paper. Wash the residue with hot water. Filter through 
Whatman 41 No. paper in 600 ml beaker. Acidify the filtrate with hydrochloric acid. Add 20 ml of 10 per cent Barium chloride  solution. Stir the solution and digest on burner. Allow to settle BaSO
4 
precipitate  over night. Filter the precipitate throug h Whatman No. 42 filter paper. Wash the 
precipitate with water. Ignite the precipitate in muffle furnace in pre weighed platinum crucible up to 850
0. Allow to cool and weigh.  
  Each g of weight of precipitate is equivalent to 0.13734 g of Sulphur.  
 
5.2.12. -  Qualitative Reactions of S ome Radicals  
 Sodium  
 
 Sodium compounds, moistened with hydrochloric acid and introduced on a platinum wire 
into the flame of a Bunsen burner, give a yellow colour to the flame.   347  Solutions of sodium salts yield, with solution of uranyl zinc acetate, a yellow crystalline 
precipitate.  
 
Potassium  
 
 Potassium compounds moistened with hydrochloric acid and introduced on platinum wire 
into the flame of a Bunsen burner, give a violde colour to the flame.  
 
 Moderately strong solutions of potassium salts, which have been previously ignited to 
remove ammonium salts, give a white, crystalline precipitate with perchloric acid.  
  Solutions of potassium salts, which have been previously ignited to free them from 
ammonium salts and from which iodine has been removed, give a yellow precipitate with solution os sodium cobaltinitrte and acetic acid.  
 Magnesium  
 
 Solution of magnesium salts yield a white precipitate with solution of ammonium carbonate, 
especially on boiling, but yield no precipitate  in the presence of solution of ammonium chloride. 
 
Solution of magnesium salts yield a white crystalline precipitate with solution of sodium 
phosphate in the presence of ammonium salts and dilute ammonia solution.  
 
 Solution of magnesium salts yield with solution of sodium hydroxide a white precipitate 
insoluble in excess of the reagent, but soluble in solution of ammonium chloride. 
 
Carbonates and Bicarbonates  
 
 Carbonates and bicarbonates effervesce with dilute acids, liberating carbon doxide; the gas 
is colourless and produces a wihte precipitate in solution of calcium hydroxide. 
 
Solutions of carbonates produce a brownish- red precipitate with solution of mercuric chloride; 
Solutions of bicarbonates produce a white precipitate.  
 
Solutions of carbonates y ield, with solution of silver nitrate, a with precipitate which 
becomes yellow on the addition of an excess of the reagent and brown on boiling the mixture. The precipitate is soluble in dilute ammonia solution and in dilute nitric acid.  
 
 Solutions of car bonates produce, at room temperature, a white precipitate with solution of 
magnesium sulphate. Solutions of bicarbonates yield no precipitate with the reagent at room temperature, but on boiling the mixture a white precipitate is formed.  
 
Solutions of bica rbonates, on boiling, liberate carbon dioxide which produces a white 
precipitate in solution of calcium hydroxide. 
 
Sulphates  
 
 Solutions of sulphates yield, with solution of barium chloride, a white precipitate insoluble 
in hydrochloric acid. 
  Solutions of sulphates yield, with solution of lead acetate, a white precipitate soluble in 
solution of ammonium acetate and in solution of sodium hydroxide. 
  348 Chlorides  
 
 Chlorides, heated with manganese dioxide and sulphuric acid, yield chlorine, recognisable 
by its odour and by giving a blue colour with potassium iodide and solution of starch.  
 
Calcium  
 
Solutions of calcium salts yield, with solution of ammonium carbonate, a white precipitate 
which after boiling and cooling the mixture, is insoluble in solution of ammonium  chloride.    349 APPENDIX- 6 
 
6.1. WEIGHTS AND MEASURES  
 
6.1.1. -  METRIC EQUIVALENTS OF CLASSICAL WEIGHTS AND MEASURES  
 
Weights and measures described in Ayurvedic classics and their metric equivalents adopted 
by the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee  
  
 The following table of metric equivalents of 
weights and measures, linear measures and 
measurement of time used in the Ayurvedic classics 
have been approved by the Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopoeia committee in consultation with 
Indian Standards Institution. 
 
 
I. WEIGHTS AND MEASURES  
 
 
Classical Unit    Metric  
     Equivalent  
 
1 Ratti or Gu ®j¢   = 125 mg 
8 Ratti or Gu ®j¢s =1 M ¢¾a = 1 g  
12 M ¢¾as  =1 Kar ¾a = 12 g 
      (Tola)   
2 Kar ¾as (Tolas)  =1 ¹ukti = 24 g 
2 ¹uktis   =1 Palam  = 48 g 
(4 Kar ¾as or Tolas)  
2 Palams   =1 Prasrti  = 96 g 
2 Pras ¨tis  =1 Ku ²ava = 192 g 
2 Ku²avas  =1 M ¢nika = 384 g 
2 M¢nikas   =1 Prastha  = 768 g 
4 Prasthas   =1 ¡² haka  = 3 kg 73 g 
4 ¡²hakas   =1 D¨o´a = 12kg 228 g 
2 D¨o´as  =1 ¹¦ rpa = 24kg 576 g 
2 ¹¦rpas  =1 D¨o´i = 49kg 152 g 
      (Vahi)   
4 D¨o´is  =1 Kh ¢ri = 196kg 608g 
1 Palam     = 48 g 
100 Palams   =1 Tula  = 4 kg 800 g 
20 Tulas   =1 Bh ¢ra = 96 kg 
 
 
  In case of liquids, the metric 
equivalents would be the corresponding litre and 
milliliter.  
  II. LINEAR MEASURES  
Classical Unit  Inches   Metric  
    
 Equivalents  
 
1. Yavodara   1/8 of ¾"  0.24 cm  
2. A¬gula  ¾"  1.95 cm  
3. Bitahasti   9"  22.86 cm  
4. Aratni   10 ½"   41.91 cm  
5. Hasta   18"  45.72 cm  
6. N¨pahasta   22"  55.88 cm  
   (R¢jahasta)  
7. Vyama   72"  182.88 cm  
 
III. MEASUREMENT OF TIME  
Unit    Equival ent (in  
    hours, minutes  
    & seconds)  
2 K¾a¬a =1 Lava  
2 Lavas  =1 Nime ¾a 
3 Nime ¾as =1 Ka¾ °ha = 4.66 seconds  
1 Ghati     = 24 Minutes  
30 Kas °has =1 Kal ¢ = 2 Minutes  
                             20 seconds  
20 Kal ¢ + 3  
Ka¾°has =1 Muh¦ rta = 48 Minutes   
 
30 Muh¦ rtas =1 Ahor ¢tra = 24 Hrs.  
15 Ahor ¢tras =1 Pak ¾a = 15 Days  
2 Pak ¾as =1 M ¢sa = 30 Days/  
       One Month 
2 M¢sa  =1 §tu   = 60 Days/  
       Two Months  
3 §tus   =1 Ayana  = 6 Months  
2 Ayanas  =1 Samvatsara = 12 Months/  
        One Year  
5 Samvatsara  =1Yuga  = 5 Years   
 1 Ahor ¢tra of Devas   = 1 Year  
1 Ahor ¢tra of Pitaras   = 1 Month   350 6.2. -  METRIC SYSTEM  
 
Measure of Mass (Weights)  
 
1 Kilogram (Kg)   – is the mass of the International Prototype Kilogram.  
1 Gramme (g)     – the 1000th  part of 1 Kilogram.  
1Milligram (mg)   – the 1000th   part of 1 gramme.  
1 Microgram (µg)   – the 1000th part of 1 milligram.  
 
Measures of capacity  (Volumes)  
 
1 Litre (1) is the volume occupied at its temperature of maximum density by a quantity of water     having a mass of 1 Kilogra m. 
 1 Millilitre (ml) the 1000
th part of 1 litre.  
 The accepted relation between the litre and the cubic centimetre is 1 litre –1000.027 cubic centimeters.  
 
Relation of capacity of Weight (Metric)  
 
One litre of water at 20
0 weighs 997.18 grammes when weighed in air of density 0.0012 gramme 
per milli litre against brass weights of density 84 grammes per millilitre.  
 
Measures of Length  
 
 1 Metre (m) is the length of the International Prototype Metre at 0.  
 1 Centimetre (cm)    – the 100th part of 1 metre.  
 1 Millimetre (mm)    – the 1000th part of 1 metre.  
 1 Micron (µ)              – the 1000th part of 1 millimetre  
 1 Milliimicron (mµ)  – the 1000th part of micron   
 388                                            INDEX  
Aadu -tinna -paalai- 88 
Aakaraadya - 182 
Aalubaalu – 43, 45  
Aamaabhaaji - 63 
Aapataa - 131 
Aarai velyakhera  -1 
Aasotaro - 131 
Aavanune - 220  
Aazi Khair  -1 
A. bracteata Retz.  - 88 
A. dorsata - 214 
A. flo rea- 214 
A. indica - 214 
A. integrifolia  L.f. - 120 
Absinth - 38 
Absinthin - 39 
Acacia pennata (L.) Willd. -1 
Acalypha fruticosa  Forsk.  - 99 
Acalypha indica  L. - 63 
Acalyphamide  - 65 
Acalyphine  - 65 
Acetate buffer 5.5 pH  - 307 
Acetic acid – 233, 307  
Acetic acid Sp. - 257 
Acetic Acid, Glacial - 307 
Acetic Acid, Lead -Free - 308 
Acetone - 308 
N-acetyl nornuciferine - 89 
Acidic polysaccharide - 149 
Acidity - 250 
¡d¢r¤ -1 
Adavi ishapugorulu - 189 
Adiantaceae - 16 
Adiantone  - 17 
Adiantoxide - 17 
Adia ntum capillus -veneris  L. - 16 
Adris ¢nuj- 175 
Aduthinapalai - 88 
Aechmandra epigaea Arn.  - 167 
Aesculetin - 189 
Aflatoxins - 288 
Afsanteen - 38 
Agavaceae - 104 
α-Agrofuran  - 130  
Aizoaceae - 54, 101,182,187 
Ajaina satva - 226 
Ajamo - 78 
Ajavaan phulla - 226 
Ajavana - 78 
Ajmod - 78 
Ajmoda Oova - 78 
Ajmuda - 78 
Ajowan - 78 
Ajvaayan kaa Sat - 226 
Ajvayana sat - 226 
Ajya - 204 
¡k¢ºagaru²a- 167 
¡k¢sam¢¼si- 12, 14  
Akasa tamarai - 70 
Akasa thamara-  70 
Akasha garudagadde - 167 
Akashagarudi - 167 
Akharij – 94, 96  
Akujemudu - 127 
Alaicha - 165 
Alanine - 37 
Albaspidin - 159 
Alcohol - 308 
Alcohol, Aldehyde -free - 309 
Alcohol, Sulphate -free - 309 
9-Aliphatic alcohols - 159 
Alkaloid Estimation - 251 
Alkaloid punarnavin e - 102 
Alkaloidal Assays - 245 
Alkaloids  – 33, 58, 65, 81, 140, 146, 
186, 192  
Alkanes  - 174 
Alpinia calcarata  Rosc.  - 59 
Alubakraapandu – 43, 45  
Alubalu – 43, 45  
Alubukhara – 43, 45  
¡luka– 43, 45  
Aluvaalu – 43, 45  
Amalbeda - 196 
Amalbeda - 196 
Amaradudheli -193 
Amaranthaceae - 148 
Amarpoi - 124 
Ambha - 208  
 389 Ambu - 208 
Amentoflavone  - 170 
Amino acids - 37 
Amm anpatchaiarisi - 23 
Ammonia buffer solutions 9.5 pH - 310 
Ammonia solution Sp. - 257 
Ammonia Solution, Iron -free- 310 
Ammonia, x N  - 310 
Ammoniacal solution of Copper oxide 
(Cuoxam) - 234 
Ammonia -cyanide solution Sp. - 259 
Ammonia -cyanide wash solution - 260 
Ammonium chloride - 255 
Ammonium Chloride Solution  - 310 
Ammonium citrate solution S p. - 259 
Ammonium molybdate - 310 
Ammonium oxalate AsT - 252 
Ammonium Thiocyanate - 310 
Ammonium Thiocyanate Solution - 310 
Ammonium Thiocyanate, 0.1N - 310 
Amomum subulatum Roxb.  - 165 
Amorphophallus sylvaticus (Roxb.) 
Kunth -5 
¡mragandhi -guggulu  -3 
A¼ºumat¤- 139 
α- Amyrin  - 74 
β-Amyrin - 74, 84, 174, 195 
Analan ¢m¢- 133 
Anasapuveru - 171 
Andamarine - 87 
Anetaa - 106 
Angeloylcumambrin B - 62 
Angleloylajadin - 62 
Aniline c hloride  solution - 233 
Aniline chloride solution - 310 
Anisaldehyde -Sulphuric Acid Reagent - 
310 
Anisoelol - 162 
Anisomeles malabar ica (L.) R. Br. ex 
Sims - 160 
Anisomelic acid - 162 
Anisomelin - 162 
Anisomelode - 162 
Anisomelyl acetate - 162 
Annashuppu - 171 
Anogeissus latifolia  Wall.  -34, 36  Ansafal - 171 
Antara gange - 70 
Antara- Tamara-  70 
Anthraquinone derivatives - 238 
Anushapp u- 171 
Apa- 208 
Apiaceae - 12, 14, 78  
Apidae - 214 
Apigenin - 116, 125, 170  
3',4',5' apige nin- 114 
Apigenin 5 -glucoside - 46 
Apigenin -7-rhamnoglucoside - 184 
Apigenin -8-C-glucoside - 184 
Apium graveolens L. - 78 
Apta - 131 
Apu¾paphalada-  120 
Ara´ya-s¦ra´a -5 
Araaruta - 7 
Araceae - 5, 70, 156 
¡r¢ro°a - 7 
Ararut - 7 
Archangelone - 15 
Are- 131 
Arecaceae - 90, 191 
Arecaceae - 90 
Argemone Oil - 249 
Āri -1 
Ari- 131 
Aristolactam - 89 
Aristolochia bracteolata Lam.  - 88 
Aristolochiaceae - 88,129 
Aristolo chic acid  - 89 
Arjunolic acid  - 100 
Aromadendrin - 53 
Arsenic - 252 
Arsenic solution, dilute, AsT - 252 
Arsenic solution, strong, AsT - 252 
Arsenomolybdic Acid Reagent -311 
Arteglasin A - 62 
Artemisia absinth ium L. - 38 
Artocarpus heterophyllus  Lamk.  - 120 
Aruruttukkilangu - 7 
Asaarun - 129 
Asabarag - 160 
Asanta - 131  
 390 Asarak - 160 
α-Asarone - 130 
Asaroon - 129 
Asarum europaeum L. - 129 
Asclepiadaceae  -  73,193 
Ashta - 131 
Ashtaa - 131 
Asitak ¢raskara- 173 
Aºmariripu - 66 
Asparagosides - 42 
Asparagus - 41 
Asparagus officinalis L. - 41 
Asparagusic acid - 42 
Asparasaponin I - 42 
Asparasaponin II - 42 
β-Aspidin - 159 
Aspidium filix -mas L. - 158 
Asteraceae - 38,83,92,94, 96,198 
Asteraceae Chinnapatr ¢- 61 
Asthi º¨¬khal¢ - 9 
Asthisam h¨ta- 9 
Asthma weed - 23 
Astragalin - 17, 31 
Asundro - 131 
Atapatiyan - 73 
Atib¨hatphala - 120 
Atimukt ¢- 106 
Atimuktaka - 106 
Atropine  – 76 
Atu-tinlap - 88 
Avanti - 83 
Axle – wood -34, 36  
Ayamodakum - 78 
Azulene - 39, 53  
Baadiyaan - 171 
Baadiyaan khataai - 171 
Baadiyaane khataai - 171 
Baakali -34, 36  
Baara aliachi - 165 
Bad elaach - 165 
Badaa alaicha - 165 
Badi dudhdi - 23 
Badi ilaayachi - 165 
Badi kateli - 26 
Badi kateri - 26 Bagaura - 61 
Bahnaree – 152, 154  
Bahuguni - 115 
Bahuka ´°aka- 127 
Bahuv ¢raª– 152, 154  
Bahuvar – 152, 154  
Bainchaa - 163 
Bainchi -kul- 163 
Baird -Parker Agar Medium - 267 
Bajar- 185 
Bajni - 185 
Bajra - 185 
Bajri - 185 
Balabhadr ¢- 175 
Balarakkasi -gidaa - 51 
Balsamodendron caudata  Mauch. -3 
Baltang - 189 
Baltanga - 189 
Balukaasaaga - 187 
Banajuani - 78 
Banne - 131 
Banni - 142 
Bano Kundri - 19, 21  
Bansang - 145 
Banyamani - 78 
Bara elach i- 165 
Baraa -elaachi - 165 
Barakherui - 23 
Barre - 92 
Bartang - 189 
Bartung - 189 
Basriookharad - 177 
Bastard saffron – 92, 94, 96  
Bauhinia racemosa  Lamk.  - 131 
Bauraj - 131 
Bed Sada - 169 
Bella -206 
Bellam -206 
Bengal gram - 29 
Benkar - 106 
Bent - 191 
Berbamine - 33 
Berberidaceae - 32 
Berberine - 33, 81 
Berberis aristata DC. - 32  
 391 Bergenin  - 138 
Beta- 191 
Betasu - 191 
Bethagokhru - 56 
Betulin - 116 
Betulinic acid - 162, 174  
Bh¦- n¤l¤- 150 
Bh¦ra´²¤- 66 
Bh¦rigandh ¢- 12, 14  
Bh¦take¹£ - 12, 14  
Bhadrai l¢- 165 
Bhagapatr ¢- 68 
Bhakhada - 56 
Bhakhar - 56 
Bhan°¢k¤- 26 
Bhekal - 163 
Bhisata - 182 
Bhissata - 182 
Bhonkar – 152, 154  
Bhrangaraja - 83 
Bhuin Kumdda - 108 
Bhursunga - 145 
Bhurundi - 66 
Bhushan - 169 
Bhutakesi - 12, 14  
Bhuvana - 208 
Bignoniaceae - 135 
B¤japatr ¢ - 16 
Bilangra - 163 
Bilikomme - 101 
Bimb £ - 19, 21  
Bimbik ¢- 19, 21  
Bimbu - 19, 21  
Bincha - 163 
Biochenin -A-7-glucoside - 31 
Bis- 169 
Bisauraa - 158 
Bismarck brown - 233 
Bismuth Sulphite Agar Medium - 268 
Biswal  -1 
Bjr- 185 
Bobbaasi - 47, 49 
Bodi Ajamo - 78 
Bonajain - 78 Bone setter - 9 
Bonjamani - 78 
Boppayi - 47, 49  
Boraginaceae – 66, 152, 154 , 177  
Borajhanji - 70 
Borax - 311 
Boric acid - 255 
Bornyl acetate - 62 
Boromali - 106 
Borthekera - 196 
Bracteated birthwort - 88 
Brassica campest ris L. - 220 
Brassicaceae - 220 
Breamer’s reagent - 234 
B¨hadel¢- 165 
B¨hat Dugdhik ¢ - 23 
B¨hat el ¢- 165 
B¨hat¤ - 26 
B¨hatka´°ak¢r¤- 26 
Brilliant Green Agar Medium - 268 
Brominated hydrochloric acid AsT - 253 
Bromine Solution - 311 
Bromine solution  AsT - 253 
Bromophenol Blue Indicator - 311 
Bryhoti - 26 
Bryonia epigaea Rottler - 167 
Bryonin  - 168 
Budi eleichi - 165 
Buffer solution pH 2.5 - 260 
Buffered Sodium Chloride -Peptone 
Solution pH 7.0 -  269 
Bullrush millet - 185 
Burseraceae -3 
3-n-butyl ph thalide - 79 
Buut - 29 
Byakura - 26 
C. aromaticus Benth.  - 124 
C. cordifolia  Cogn , - 19, 21  
C.indica  W & A - 19, 21  
C. myxa  Roxb. – 152, 154  
C. obliqua Willd. – 152, 154  
1-Caffeylglucose - 17 
γ-Cadinene - 62 
Cadmium - 252 
Caesalpiniaceae - 131  
 392 Calactin - 195 
Calamenene - 62 
Calamus rotang  L. - 191 
Calamus thwaitesii  Becc.  - 90 
Caldera Bush - 86 
Calotropagenin - 195 
Calotropin - 195 
Cambogin - 197 
Campesterol - 17 
Campesterol - 87 
Campesterol - 93 
Camphor  - 60 
Camphor - 210 
Canada balsam (as a Mountan t) - 234 
Canada Balsam Reagent - 311 
Ca´aka - 29 
Candra - 210 
Cane - 191 
n- Caproic acid -53 
Carbon Tetrachloride - 312 
Cardenolides  - 195 
Carica papaya  L. - 47, 49  
Caricaceae - 47, 49  
β-Carotene -  48 
Carmapatra - 202 
β - Carophyllene - 62 
Carpaine  – 48, 50  
Carpesanine  - 50 
Carthamin - 97 
Carthamus  tinctorius L. – 92, 94, 96  
Carvacrol - 125 
β-Caryophyllene - 125 
Casein Soyabean Digest Agar Medium - 
269 
(+)-Catechin - 170 
Caustic Alkali Solution, 5 per cent - 312 
Celogenamide - 149 
Celosia argentea L. - 148 
Celosian - 149 
Cenkalunir kilanku - 68 
Cenkiluvai  Ilai-3 
Cenkotivel - 133 
Cephalandra indica  Naud.  - 19, 21  
Cepha landrine - 20 
Cephalandrine A  – 20, 22  
Cephalandrine B – 20, 22  Ceruppatai - 177 
Ceryl alcohol - 89 
Cetrimide Agar Medium - 269 
Chaachi bet - 191 
Chaalmagraa - 180 
Chaalmograa - 180 
Chaarigehuli - 196 
Chakka - 120 
Chalcone - 138 
Chalcone diglycoside - 130 
Challe kaayi – 152 
Chamanti - 61 
Chanaa - 29 
Chandra kaasi soppa - 182 
Chandramukhi - 61 
Chand rasi koora - 182 
Chane - 29 
Chanya - 29 
Charanai - 80 
Charcoal, Decolourising - 312 
Chary hannu – 43, 45  
Chatrake ºara- 75 
Chaulmugra - 180 
Chaulmugraa - 180 
Cheetaa - 133 
Chekkera - 218 
Chelubaaladgidh - 66 
Chemmaram - 135 
Chendurakam - 92 
Chenna - 156 
Chentukam – 94, 96  
Chepputhatteku - 177 
Chepututaku - 129 
Cheru vazhuthalai - 26 
Cheru vazhuthina - 26 
Cherupadi - 177 
Cherychettu – 43, 45  
Chhagal bete -193 
Chhevvu -kurti - 115 
Chhikur - 142 
Chholaa - 29 
Chhonkar - 142 
Chhotaa Kiraayataa - 115 
Chhotaagokshr u- 56 
Chick pea - 29  
 393 Chikkachalli - 154 
Chilgoja - 118 
Chilgojha - 118 
Chilgojhaa - 118 
Chilgoza - 118 
Chilgoza pine - 118 
Chilgozaa - 118 
Chilgozah - 118 
Chini - 218 
Chinn a kuppi - 99 
Chinni - 99 
Chinnigida - 99 
Chinni -Ka Jhar - 99 
Chinnnimara - 99 
Chirc hitta- 75 
Chiri - 118 
Chirimaanu -34, 36  
Chiritta - 75 
Chirrigalgoja - 118 
Chitra - 32 
Chitraa - 32 
Chittaratha - 59 
Chitti benda - 51 
Chloral Hydrate - 312 
Chloral Hydrate Solution - 313 
Chloral hydrate solution - 234 
Chloral iodine - 234 
Chloral Iodine  Solution - 313 
Chlorinated soda solution (Bleaching 
solution) - 234 
Chloroform - 313 
Chlorogenic acid - 189 
Chlorziniciodine (Iodinated zinc 
chloride  solution) -  234 
Cholesterol - 93 
Choti Jala -kumbhi - 70 
Chromic acid solution - 234 
Chrysanthemum - 61 
Chrysanthemum indicum L.- 61 
Chrysanthenine glucoside - 62 
Chrysanthenone - 62 
Chrysin 7 -glucoside - 46 
Chrysoeriol - 125 
Chrysophanic acid - 189 
Chunnaa - 29 
Chural - 191 Chutakkapuram - 210 
Chuvannakkoduveli - 133 
Cicer arietinum  L. - 29 
Cilagoja - 118 
Cineol  – 60, 166  
1,8- cineole -125 
1,8-cineol - 62 
Cinnamomum camphora  (L.) Nees & 
Eberm.  - 210 
Cinnamomum Oil - 200 
Cinnamomum zeylanicum  Blume - 200 
Cinnamon oil - 200 
Cirsilineol - 87 
Cirsimaritin - 125 
Ciruceruppatai - 182 
Cissus quadrangularis  L. - 9 
Citrate -cyanide wash solution - 260 
Citric acid - 81, 188  
Citric acid AsT - 253 
Clarified butter - 204 
Clarified Cow’s Butter - 204 
Clove - 212 
Clustered Hiptage - 106 
Coccinia grandis  (L.) Voigt - 19, 21  
Coldenia procumbens L. - 177 
Coleus amboinic us Lour.  - 124 
Combretaceae -34, 36  
Commiphora caudata  Engl. -3 
Common Asarbacca- 129 
Common rattan - 191 
1-Coumarylgalac tose- 17 
Coniferae - 118 
Convolvulaceae - 108 
Copper Sulphate - 314 
Copper Sulphate, Anhydrous - 314 
Corallin soda - 234 
Coralloca rpenoyl  ester - 168 
Corallocarpus epigaeus Benth. ex Hook . 
f. - 167 
Corallocarpuscalarolide - 168 
Cordia dichotoma  Forst. f.  – 152, 154  
Cork Swallow -wort- 73 
Coroglaucigenin - 195 
Cottonseed oil  - 249 
6-O-(E)-p-coumaroyl glucopyranose - 
164  
 394 Coumarin  – 13, 15  
N-(P-coumaroyl) tryptamine - 93 
Coumestan - 84 
Country borage - 124 
Crategolic acid - 125 
Cresol Red - 314 
Cresol Red Solution  - 314 
Cucurbitaceae - 19, 21, 167  
Curcumene - 62 
Curcumin - 342 
Curry leaf - 145 
Cyanidine -3-glucoside - 71 
Cyanogenic  glycoside - 31,65 
Cycloart-25-en-3-β-24-diol- 128 
Cycloartenol  – 121, 128  
Cycloartenone  – 121 
Cycloeucalenol - 128 
Cyclonivuliaol  - 128 
p-Cymene - 125, 166  
D. barbiflora - 158 
D. blandtorchi - 158 
D. marginata - 158 
D. odontoloma - 158 
D. schimperiane - 158 
D¢²ima pu ¾pa- 135 
D¢²imacchada - 135 
D¢runis ¢- 32 
D¢rusit¢ Taila -  200 
D¢rvi- 32 
D¤pyaka - 78 
Daalchini taila - 200 
Daarhaldi - 32 
Daaruchini taila - 200 
Daaruhalada - 32 
Daaruhaldar - 32 
Daaruhaldi - 32 
Daaruharidraa - 32 
Daarunaj -akrabi - 198 
Daemia extensa (Jacq. ) R.Br. - 193 
Dahan - 80 
Daka - 208 
Dalachini nune - 200 
Dalcina taila - 200 
Damm -ul-Akhwain- 104 
Dandaa thohara - 127 
Darhald - 32 Darhaldi - 32 
Darunaj Aqrabi- 198 
Darusita taila - 200 
Daucosterol - 87 
Demethoxysudachitin - 114 
Dengaabheji - 26 
Desmoca rpin - 140 
Desmodin - 140 
Desmodium gangeticum DC. - 139 
Desoxycholate -Citrate Agar Medium - 
269 
Dev¤- 160 
Deva dhup -3 
Devakusuma  - 212 
Dextrin  - 8 
Dhaau -34, 36  
Dhaauyaa gaachh -34, 36  
Dhaavaa -34, 36  
Dhaavado -34, 36  
Dhaavdaa -34, 36  
Dhar ¢- 111 
Dhauraa-34, 36  
Dhav -34, 36  
Dhava  -34, 36  
Dhaval -34, 36  
Dh¦mrapatr ¢- 88 
Dhurandhara -34, 36  
Di and  sesquiterpenoids α-copaene - 62 
Diasarone -1- 130 
Diasarone -2- 130 
Dihydroasparagusic acid - 42 
(2S)- 7,3'-dihydroxy -4'-methoxyflavan - 
105 
3',5'-dihydoxy -4'-methoxywogonin - 114 
4, 5-dihydroxy -3,6,7 -trimethoxyflavone - 
162 
Dikaamaali - 113 
Dikaamaari - 113 
Dikamali - 113 
Dikemaali - 113 
Dikkaamalli - 113 
Dikkamali - 113 
Dilk– 152, 154  
Dilute acetic acid Sp. - 257 
Dilute ammonia solution Sp. - 257 
Dilute Hydrochloric Acid - 319  
 395 Dilute hydrochloric acid Sp. - 257 
Dilute standard lead solution - 259 
2-(N,N-dimethyl  amino )acetophenone - 
140 
Dinduge -34, 36  
Dioleolinolein - 93, 119  
Diosgenin  – 76, 102  
Diosmetin  – 74, 109 
Diosmetin -7-O-β− glucoside  - 109 
Diospyros embryopteris  L. - 173 
Diospyros per egrina  Gurke - 173 
Diphenylamine barium sulphonate - 314 
Dipterocarpaceae - 137 
Disodium Ethylenediamine tetraacetate  
Diterpenoids - 162 
Dithizone - 315 
Dithizone extraction solution - 259 
Dithizone -carbon tetrachloride solution - 
260 
D-mandelonitrile -β-gentiobioside 
dehydrowogonin 7 -glucoside  - 46 
D-mandelonitril -β- glucoside  – 44, 46  
Dodda gejjalakai - 163 
Dodda yalakki - 165 
Dodee - 73 
Dodi Shak - 73 
Doduchallu - 154 
Donda tige - 19, 21  
Dorli - 26 
Doronicum hookeri  C.B.Clarke - 198 
Dotriacont -22,25 -diol-10-one- 168 
Dotriacontane - 188 
Dracaena cinnabari Balf.  f. - 104 
Dragendorff Á  Ás Reagent - 315 
Dragon ΄s blood - 104 
Dropterin - 159 
Dryopteridaceae - 158 
Dryopteris filix – mas (L.) Schott.  - 158 
Dudali - 23 
Dudeli - 23 
Dudhelo - 23 
Dudhi - 23 
Dudili - 23 
Dudoli - 23 
Dugdhik ¢- 23 
Dumparastramu - 59 Duserasag - 182 
Dustapuchettu -193 
Dustuputige -193 
Duyi papata  - 122 
Dv¤p¢ntara ¹at¢var¤ - 41 
Dv¤p¢ntara Damanaka -  38 
Dv¤p¢ntara T agara - 129 
Dvij¢y¢¬g¤- 101 
E. hysoppifolium  (Willd.) Verd.  - 115 
E. littorale Blume - 115 
E. pilulifera Auct. non L.  - 23 
Ebenaceae - 173 
Edible pine - 118 
EDTA solution 0.05 M - 315 
Ekalipta - 222 
Elav¢lukam – 43, 45  
Elavaaluka – 43, 45  
Ellagic acid  - 37 
Ellagotannins  - 24 
Ellu- 224 
Elluenna - 224 
Eluka – 43, 45  
β-Elumene - 62 
Emodin - 189 
Enicoflavin - 116 
Enicostemma axillare (Lam.) A. 
Raynal.  - 115 
Eosin - 234, 315  
Eosin Solution - 315 
Epegenin  - 181 
Ephelic acid glycoside - 116 
Epigaeusyl  ester- 168 
Era´²akarka °¤ - 47, 49  
Erandakaakadi - 47, 49  
Erandakharbujaa - 47, 49  
Ericaceae - 202 
Eriochrome Black T - 315 
Eriochrome Black T indicator 0.1per 
cent solution-  315 
Eriodyctol - 125 
Errachitramulam - 133 
Erythrocentaurine - 116 
Escherichia co li - 277 
Esculin - 184 
Eskadantikura - 187  
 396 Esters - 251 
Ethyl Acetate - 315 
Ethyl Alcohol - 315 
Ethyl salicylate - 125 
Eucalyptus - 222 
Eucalyptus globulus  Labill - 222 
Eucalyptus Oil - 222 
Eugenia caryophyllus  (Spreng) Sprague - 
212 
Eugenol - 125 
Euphor bia hirta  L. - 23 
Euphorbia nivulia  Buch. -Ham.  - 127 
Euphorbiaceae - 23, 63, 99, 127 
European willow - 169 
Euscaphic acid - 125 
F. ramontchii   Herit.  - 163 
Fabaceae - 29, 139, 150  
β – Farnesene - 62 
Fargesin - 62 
Fatty Oil  Estimation - 249 
Fehling’s S olution - 316 
Ferric c hloride  solution - 234 
Ficoidaceae - 101 
Fiehe’s test - 338 
Filicin  - 159 
Filixic acid - 159 
Filmarone - 159 
Fixed Oil – 237 
Flacourside  - 164 
Flacourtia indica  (Burm.f.) Merr.  - 163 
Flacourtiaceae - 163, 180  
α-Flavaspidic acid - 159 
Flavellagic acid - 37 
Flavon e- 162 
Flavonoid  – 24, 31, 55, 109, 140, 186, 
192 
Flavonoid glycoside s- 58 
Flavonol glycosides  - 172 
Fluid Casein Digest -Soya Lecithin -
Polysorbate 20 Medium - 270 
Fluid Lactose Medium - 270 
Fluid Selenite -Cystine Med ium - 273 
Foal foot - 129 
Folin Ciocalteu Reagent - 317 
Forest pepper - 80 
Formaldehyde Solution - 316 Formaldehyde Solution, Dilute - 317 
Formic acid - 317 
Fragilin - 170 
Fragrant Screwpine - 86 
Friedelan -3-one- 10 
Fructose – glucose ratio - 341 
G. arborea Roxb.  - 113 
G. molluginoides  Wt. - 187 
Gaabh - 173 
Gaara - 173 
Gab- 173 
Gadabani - 101 
Gadida gadapa - 88 
Gai Ghia - 204 
Gaija soppu - 101 
Gakhura - 56 
Galgoja - 118 
Gallic acid  – 35, 155, 174  
(+)-Gallocatechin - 170 
Gallotannins - 37 
Gandapuro - 202 
Gandhamadan ¤- 12, 14  
Gandha ºiph¢ - 51 
Gandhap¦ ra Patra Taila -  202 
Gandhapura - 202 
Gandhapura tailam - 202 
Gandhapuraa kaa tel  - 202 
Gandhap ūrna taila - 202 
Gandhapuro - 202 
Gandharaajan - 113 
Gandhibuti - 182 
Gandibudi - 182 
Gandibuti - 182 
Gandpuro  - 202 
Ganger - 75 
Gangetin - 140 
Gangetinin - 140 
Gangro - 75 
Gantelu - 185 
Gantia - 185 
Garbanzol - 31 
Garcinia pedunculata  Roxb.  - 196 
Garc inol- 197 
Gardenia gummifera L. f. - 113 
Gardenin - 114 
Gargari - 83  
 397 Garudphala - 180 
Gathi tagara - 129 
Gaultheria fragrantissima  Wall. - 202 
Gaura -34, 36  
Gava Ghee - 204 
Gava Ghrit - 204 
Gaya Ghee - 204 
Gaya ka ghee - 204 
Genkwanin  - 116 
Genkwanin 5-glucoside - 46 
Gentiana kurroo Royle - 175 
Gentianaceae - 115, 175  
Gentianic acid  - 176 
Gentianine - 116 
Gentiocrucine - 116 
Germacrene -D- 62 
Ghanas ¢ra- 210 
Ghee - 204 
Ghetkochu - 156 
Ghilodi - 19, 21  
Ghimasak - 54 
Gholam - 19, 21  
Ghrta - 204 
Gilaas – 43, 45  
Gingely oil - 224 
Girij¢- 175 
Gisekia pharnaceoides L. - 187 
Gittapakau -193 
Glinus lotoides L. - 182 
Glucose - 93 
2´-O-glucosides - 55 
Glycerine - 234, 317 
Glycerin e Solution - 318 
Gobor sitha  - 122 
Goda -cani- 101 
Godasurana -5 
Godnimb - 145 
Gogh ¨ta - 204 
Gok¾ura - 56 
Gok¾uraka - 56 
Gokharaa - 56 
Gokhru - 56 
Gokhuree - 56 
Gokshra - 56 
Gokshur - 56 Gokshura - 56 
Gokshuraka - 56 
Gondali - 70 
Gondri lota - 177 
Gop¢lakarka °¤- 47, 49  
Gopaka ´°aª- 163 
Gornimb - 145 
Governors plum - 163 
Gr¤¾macha traka  - 54 
Gram - 29 
Grampu - 212 
Granthim ¦la - 59 
Granthi -p¢dik¢- 158 
Guda  -206 
Guggilam - 137 
Gugulsterone s - 4 
Gulad ¢ud¤ - 61 
Guldaaudi - 61 
Gule -dawoodi - 61 
Gulvidi - 115 
Gummy Gardenia - 113 
Gundaa – 152 
Gundaavada – 152 
Gunobar - 118 
Guttifera e- 196 
H. laurifolia  (Dennst.) Sleummer.  - 180 
H. wightiana  Blume - 180 
Haadabhanga gachha - 9 
Haadjodaa - 9 
Haadsaankal - 9 
Haathishundaa - 66 
Haathisudhaan - 66 
Haathisundha - 66 
Haathisuondha - 66 
Hadajoda - 9 
Hadjoda - 9 
Haematoxylin, Delafield’s - 234 
Haladvel - 106 
Haliyoon-  41 
Halphen Test  - 249 
Halyun - 41 
Hamsapadu - 177 
Hanspadi - 16  
 398 Hansraaja - 16 
Harbaraa - 29 
Harimantha ª- 29 
Harinahada - 135 
Haritama ®jar¤ - 63 
Harjora - 9 
Ha¼sapad ¤sad¨º¢- 16 
Hasti ºu´²¤ - 66 
Hatapochha - 129 
Hathichikar - 56 
Havisya - 204 
Hebba alasu - 120 
Heel kalan - 165 
Heggullu - 26 
Heliotrine  - 67 
Heliotropium indicum  L. - 66 
Hemakedara - 124 
Hemam ¦l¢- 80 
Hentriacontanol  
n-heptacosane - 136 
Hexadeca  aspidinol - 159 
n- Hexane - 318 
Hi¬gun¢²ik¢- 113 
Hikke - 160 
Hikua - 41 
Hillua - 41 
Him¢hv¢- 210 
Himab ¢luka- 210 
Hinesol -β-D-fucopyranoside  - 95 
Hiptage benghalensis  L. - 106 
Hiraadakhana - 104 
Hiraadokhi - 104 
Holetupare - 173 
Honey - 214 
β – Humulene - 62 
Hunmunaki - 163 
Hydnocarpin - 181 
Hydnocarpus pentandra  (Buch. -Ham. ) 
Oken - 180 
Hydrochloric Acid – 257, 318, 319  
Hydrochloric acid (constant -boiling 
composition) AsT - 253 
Hydrochloric acid AsT - 253 
Hydrochloric Acid, Iron -Free- 319 
Hydrochloric Acid, N - 319 Hydrogen Peroxide Solution - 319 
p-Hydroxy benzo ic acid - 87 
2-Hydroxych alcone - 105 
4′-hydroxychalcone -4-O-β-D-
glucopyranoside  - 138 
7-hydrox y-3-(3-hydroxy -4-
methoxybenzyl) chroman - 105 
Hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution 
Sp. – 259, 320 
Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride; 
Hydroxylammonium Chloride - 319 
4-hydroxy -2-methoxtdihydrochalcone - 
105 
12α-hydroxy -3-oxo-olenano -28,13 -
lactone  - 138 
Ilaayachi badi - 165 
IIaikkalli - 127 
Ilakalli - 127 
Illicium verum  Hook. f.  - 171 
Imas - 29 
Indian Acalypha - 63 
Indian barberry - 32 
Indian borage - 124 
Indian Gaub - 173 
Indian gentian - 175 
Indian Jack  fruit- 120 
Indian Nightshade - 26 
Indian Turnsole - 66 
Indian -Wintergreen - 202 
Indicine N -oxide  - 67 
Indigofera aspalathoides  Vahl ex DC.  - 
150 
Indioside - 28 
Ind¤vara - 68 
Indramaris - 63 
Inulin - 239 
Iodine and Potassium iodide solution - 
235 
Iodine w ater - 235 
Ipomoea tridentata (L.) Roth.  - 108 
Irippanpul - 108 
Iruvi - 158 
Iso-absinthin - 39 
trans  & cis-Isoasar ones- 130 
Isohydnocarpine methoxyhydnocarpin -  
 399 181 
Isopentacosanoic acid - 10 
2-isopropyl -5-methylphenol - 226 
Isoquercitrin - 17, 31,  132, 170  
Isorhamnetin - 31 
Isorhamnetin -3-gentiotrioside - 58 
Isorhamnetin -3-O-β-D-glucoside - 170 
Isoshinanolone - 134 
Isoswertisin -5-O-glucoside - 116 
Isoterrestrosin B - 58 
Isovalaraldehyde - 53 
Isovaleric -53 
Isovitexin - 116 
Ivy gourd - 19, 21  
Iya kozhundu  -1 
J¤van¤- 73 
J¤vant¤ - 73 
Jack-fruit tree - 120 
Jaggery -206 
Jal- 208 
Jala - 208 
Jala- 208 
Jalakumbh ¤ - 70 
Jalakumbhi - 70 
Jalakumbhi - 70 
Jalashamkhala - 70 
Jammi - 142 
Jand- 142  
Jangali isabgola - 189 
Jangali -Ola-5 
Jangli -kalimirch - 80 
Jatrorhizine - 33 
Javaain sara - 226 
Jeddu betta - 90 
Jenetuppa - 214 
Jhand - 142 
Jhartam – 94, 96  
Jimasaka - 54 
Jivanti - 73 
Jiwanti - 73 
Juaani saram - 226 
Jui - 122 
Juktiruhi -193 
Kaadumenagu - 80 
Kaalaa Hansraja - 16 Kaalaavaalaa - 51 
Kaalo hansaraaj - 16 
Kaandvel - 9 
Kaankod - 163 
Kaaphoraa - 210 
Kaapur - 210 
Kabandha - 208 
Kabanni - 142 
Kabba - 137 
Kachnal - 131 
Kadalai - 29 
Kadale - 29 
Kada -todali - 80 
Kadavi Ghilodi - 19, 21  
Kadavinai - 167 
Kadhi Patta - 145 
Kadhilimdo - 145 
Kadhinim - 145 
Kadi Patta - 145 
Kadu - 175 
Kadu manthara - 131 
Kaduguennai - 220 
Kadukavatha - 180 
Kadukuenna - 220 
Kaduva Taila - 220 
Kadvi naahi - 167 
Kadvi naai - 115 
Kadvinai - 167 
Kaempferol - 65 
Kaempferol -3-glucoside  - 31 
Kaempferol -3-glucuronide - 17 
Kaempferol -3-O-rutinoside - 17 
Kai°arya- 145 
Kai²arya- 145 
Kaimaavu -3 
Kainchi kakudi - 19, 21  
Kaka toddali - 80 
Kakaiyaa - 163 
Kaker - 163 
Kakra  - 122 
K¢laskandha - 173 
Kalowalo - 51 
Kalsarji - 83 
Kambu - 185 
Kampanitirai - 175  
 400 Kampu - 185 
Kanabhaturi - 19, 21  
Kanaveguchettu - 163 
Kanchana - 131 
Kandamurgarittam - 104 
Kandregu - 163 
Kandwaari vadd i- 26 
Kanghu - 163 
Kanja - 80 
Kankata - 163 
Kankra  - 122 
Kannikurukka - 124 
Kantal - 120 
Ka´°ak¤gulma  - 75 
Kanthal - 120 
Kantheikoli - 163 
Kapparillaku - 124 
Kapur - 210 
Kapura  - 210 
Karad - 92 
Karadihanni - 175 
Karadu - 148 
Karafs - 78 
Karampu - 212 
Karaphs ¢ - 78 
Karayampoovu - 212 
Kardai – 92, 94, 96  
Kardi - 92, 94, 96  
Karial -193 
Kariaphulli - 145 
Karibaevu - 145 
Karibandit - 115 
Karinguva - 113 
Karinkuvvalam - 68 
Karivempu - 145 
Karivemu - 145 
Karivepaku - 145 
Kariveppu - 145 
Karmaasu - 47, 49  
Karp ooree - 160 
Karpoorvallee - 160 
Irattai Peymarutti-  160 
Karpram - 210 
Karpur - 210 
Karpura - 210 
Karp ¦ra - 210 Karpuraamu - 210 
Karpurahalli - 124 
Karpuram - 210 
Karpuravalli - 124 
Kartum - 92 
Karumatti - 47, 49  
Karunai - 167 
Karunkuvalam - 68 
Karusakaya  -1 
Karutankilanku - 167 
Karuv ¢pa°°ai E´´a- 200 
Karuva patte enna - 200 
Karuveppilei - 145 
Kashur -gul- 189 
Kasmal - 32 
Kasube – 94, 96  
Kataai - 26,163 
Katahal - 120 
Katahala - 120 
Katal - 29,120 
Katalai - 29 
Kate gokhru - 56 
Kath sigu - 127 
Katha pengu  - 122 
Kathachmpa  - 122 
Kathal - 120 
Kathar - 120 
Kathhekirubanagida - 88 
Kattatti - 173 
Katthohar - 127 
Kattu -Karunaikizhanagu -5 
Kattumilagu - 80 
Ka°ugulma  - 80 
Kat-ukala - 163 
Ka°ukapittha - 180 
Ka°un¢h¤- 167 
Ka°upatra - 129 
Katusneha - 220 
Katutaila - 220 
Kausumbha – 94, 96  
Kavikattai - 173 
Kedagi - 86 
Keeldaaru - 158 
Kempacitramulam - 133 
Kempu chitramula - 133  
 401 Kendu - 173 
Keora - 86 
Keori - 86 
Keºahantr ¤- 142 
Kesandara - 83 
Keºar¢ja- 83 
Ketak ¤ - 86 
Ketaka - 86 
Ketoki - 86 
Kevadaa - 86 
Kevda - 86 
Kevdaa - 86 
Kewado - 86 
Kewda - 86 
Kewdaa - 86 
Keya - 86 
Khadiravall ¤ -1 
Khajoti - 63 
Khar -e-khasak khurd - 56 
Kheejado - 142 
Kheerakhodee - 73 
Khejra - 142 
Khervelya  -1 
Khokali - 99 
Khokli - 63 
Khoonkharaabaa - 104 
Khunkhaaraa - 104 
Khunkharaabaa - 104 
Kia- 86 
Kidaamaari - 88 
Kidemaar - 88 
Kīl¢la- 208 
Kilimarum -3 
Kirakanda - 167 
Kiramar - 88 
Kirambu Tailam - 212 
Kirigulia - 26 
Kitmaar - 88 
Kitmaari - 88 
K¤°am¢r¤ - 88 
K¤t¢ri- 88 
Ko´¢k¢´d¢- 38 
Kodi - 180 
Kodikki - 66 Koditamarai - 70 
Koenidine  - 146 
Koenigine - 146 
Koenimbine - 146 
Kolakannaru - 139 
Kolakuponna - 139 
Kolaponna - 139 
Kollamkova kizhang - 167 
Konda papata  - 122 
Kondakkadalai - 29 
Kondamamidi -3 
Kosundra - 131 
Kothuk - 182 
Kotivel - 133 
Kova - 19, 21  
Kovai - 19, 21  
Koval - 19, 21  
K¨¾´ada´²ik¢- 16 
Ksaudra - 214 
K¾uraka - 56 
Kuchai  -1 
Kudapayal - 70 
Kukurchuda  - 122 
Kum¢r¤vetra - 90 
Kumaari  bettha - 90 
Kumbhik ¢- 70 
Kundamaavu -3 
Kunduri - 19, 21  
Kunduru - 19, 21  
Kunru - 19, 21  
Kupaaimeni - 63 
Kuppameni - 63 
Kuppi - 63 
Kuppichettu - 63 
Kuppigida - 63 
Kuppinta - 63 
Kura´°ik¢- 148 
Kura´²a- 148 
Kuradu - 148 
Kurukkathi - 106 
Kuruntotti - 51 
Kusam - 92 
Kusharta - 173 
Kusubbi – 94, 96  
Kusubeegida - 92  
 402 Kusum - 92, 94, 96  
Kusum phool – 94, 96  
Kusuma - 92 
Kusum b– 94, 96  
Kusumbaa - 92 
Kusum bha – 92, 94, 96  
Kusumbi - 92 
Kusumbo – 92, 94, 96  
Kusumekalu - 92 
Kusumulu – 94, 96  
Kuyimpu – 92, 94, 96  
L. europeaum - 75 
Laanpadi - 148 
Labanga - 212 
Lactophenol (Amman’s Fluid)  - 235 
Lactose Broth Medium – 270 
Laghu haritama ®jar¤ - 99 
Laghu -Kupp ¤- 99 
Laghupatra var ½¢bh¦ - 101 
Lahra - 185 
Lal chitra - 133 
Lal chitrak - 133 
Lal-chita - 133 
Lal-chitrak - 133 
Lamiaceae - 124,160, 210, 216, 226  
Lan- 212 
Land caltrops - 56 
Lasora – 152, 154  
Lasuda – 152, 154  
Latakhadira  -1 
Laung - 212 
Lauraceae - 210 
Lavang - 212 
Lavanga enne - 212 
Lavanga Taila  - 212 
Lavangalu - 212 
Laving - 212 
Lavyaankudi - 26 
Lead - 252 
Lead nitrate stock solution - 257 
Lead wort - 133 
Leguminosae – Mimosaceae - 142 
Leptadenia reticulata W. & A.  - 73 
Levine Eosin -Methylene Blue Agar 
Medium -  270 
Light Petroleum - 322, 323  Lignan glucoside - 93 
Lignans sesamin - 62 
Lignified elements - 238 
Liliaceae - 41,111 
Limonene – 79, 166  
Limri - 80 
Linoleic -53, 119  
Lisodaa – 152, 154  
Lohita k ¾¤r¤- 104 
Lohitaniry ¢sa - 104 
Long - 212 
Lonpadi- 148 
Lopez tree - 80 
Lucenin - 71 
Lumanika - 163 
Lupeol - 2,195 
Luteolin - 74, 109, 125, 189  
Luteolin -7-O-β glucoside  - 109 
Luteolin -7-O-glucoside - 93 
Lycium barbarum  L. - 75 
M. koenigii. Spreng - 145 
M. lotoides Kuntz.  - 182 
Maadhavi - 106 
Maadhavivasantadhuti - 106 
Maadhivilataa - 106 
Maakaatendu - 173 
Maaladi - 113 
Maamejvaa - 115 
Maamijvaa - 115 
MacCon key Agar Medium - 271 
MacConkey Broth Medium - 271 
Machino  - 202 
Machipatri - 38 
Macrocylic diterpene s- 162 
Madagaskara plum - 163 
Madh - 214 
M¢dhav¤ - 106 
M¢dha¤lata- 106 
Madhu  - 214 
Madhumaalati - 106 
Madhuree - 160 
Madhvika - 214 
Madnu - 169 
Magne sium sulphate - 256 
Magnoflorine - 89 
Magnoliaceae - 171  
 403 Mah¢ºu´²¤- 66 
Mahadvy ¢ghr¤- 26 
Mahanimbine - 146 
Mahu - 214 
Maiden -hair fern - 16 
Malabaric acid - 162 
Malampulvan - 135 
Malchang - 169 
Male fern - 158 
Malpighiaceae - 106 
Maltose - 93 
Malukkannir am-34, 36  
Malvaceae - 51 
M¢majjaka - 115 
Manalkirai - 187 
Mancha Kanda -5 
Mandarum - 131 
Mangarvallee - 9 
Manger - 80 
Manichidr ¢- 111 
Manjalkarilaamkanni - 83 
Mannakkannunni - 83 
Manneli - 150 
Mannitol -Salt Agar Medium - 271 
Manupasupu - 32 
Maradarisina - 32 
Maramaanja - 32 
Maranta arundinacea L. - 7 
Marantaceae - 7 
Marotti - 180 
Mastaru - 38 
Mastiyaaraa - 38 
Matairesinol - 93 
Matsy ´²ikā- 218 
Matsyapatrik ¢ - 108 
Mattari - 185 
Mau- 214 
Mauritius plum - 163 
Mdhukarka °¤- 47, 49  
Me¾a-jihv¢- 189 
Med ¢ - 111 
Meda-  111 
Medaa - 111 
Medhaa - 111 
Meghapu ¾pa- 208 Melon tree - 47, 49  
Mendhadhdhi -193 
Mentha - 216 
Menthol - 216 
Mercuric Chlo ride - 320 
Mercuric Chloride Paper - 253 
Mercuric Chloride  Solution - 320 
Mercuric Chloride, 0.2 M - 320 
Mercuric Potassium Iodide Solution - 320 
Mercury - 252 
Merremia tridentata  (L.) Hall. f.  - 108 
6-methoxy genkwanin - 125 
Methyl 6 -O-(E)-p-coumaroyl 
glucopyranoside - 164 
Methyl Alcohol - 320 
Methyl Alcohol, Dehydrated - 321 
Methyl cinnamate  - 60 
Methyl eptenone  - 53 
Methyl Orange - 321 
Methyl Orange Solution - 321 
Methyl Red - 321 
Methylene blue - 235 
tri-O-Methylwedelolactone - 84 
Milagar anai- 80 
Milagu - 80 
Millon’s reagent - 235 
Mimosa  pennata  L. -1 
Mimosaceae  -1 
Minandi - 218 
Mirapagandra - 80 
Mirchiakand - 167 
Mirri - 118 
Mirrigalgoj - 118 
Mitha cherry – 43, 45  
Mitha neem - 145 
Mogali - 86 
Mogili - 86 
Molish’s Reagent - 321 
Mollugo cerviana Seringe - 54 
Mollugo hirta Thub - 182 
Mollugocin A and B - 184 
Mollugogenol  - 184 
Monochoria vaginalis  Presl.  - 68 
Monoglucoside - 93 
Monoterpenoids myrcene - 62 
Moovilai - 139  
 404 Moraceae - 120 
Moramamsi - 12, 14  
Moshipatri - 38 
Moteveldode - 165 
Mothe elaay achi- 165 
Mothi dudhi - 23 
Mothi elichi - 165 
Mothi naayati - 23 
Moto -elachi - 165 
Moupinamide - 58 
Mubaraka - 16 
Mucilage - 238 
Muconine murrayacine - 146 
Mukkutummudu - 73 
Muktajhuri - 63 
Muktavarc ¢- 63 
Mukuta manjari - 63 
M¦laphalada-  120 
Mulappumar utu- 137 
Mullamkatti - 26 
Mullumastige - 80 
Mullumuntala - 135 
Munik - 208 
Mur¢- 12, 14  
Mura - 12, 14  
Muramaansi - 12, 14  
Murelchonne - 139 
Muripindi - 63 
Murraya koenigii (L.) Spreng - 145                            
Murudonda - 167 
Mustard Oil - 220 
Mutiyarkunthal - 108 
Muttapayal - 70 
Myrcene - 125, 166  
Myricetin  -35, 37  
Myristodilinolein - 93 
Myristone - 188 
Myristo -oleo-linolein - 93 
Myrtaceae - 212, 222  
Naadihingu - 113 
Naagdanti - 66 
Naahi Kand - 167 
Naahikand - 167 
Naai - 115 
Naalla Hamsapadu - 16 Naay - 115 
Naayato - 23 
N¢²¤hi¬gu - 113 
N¢gajihv ¢- 115 
N¢hik¢- 167 
N¢hikanda - 167 
Nagado nda- 167 
Nagaladudhi -193 
N¢h¤ - 115 
Nakachana - 63 
Nakkera – 152, 154  
Nalehullu - 160 
Nalennai - 224 
Nallakova - 19, 21  
Nalleru - 9 
Nallerutige- 9 
Nanubalu- 23 
Naphthaquinones - 134 
Naphthol solution - 235 
Narasingha - 145 
Narcissin - 170 
Narivilee – 152, 154  
Naruvari – 152, 154  
Naruvili – 152, 154  
Naruviri – 152, 154  
Nattarattai - 59 
Natural Camphor - 210 
Navarayilla - 124 
Neellu - 208 
Neerganjimara - 169 
Neer u- 208 
Neggilumullu - 56 
Neglu - 56 
Nei- 204 
Nela vempali - 150 
Nelapalai - 23 
Neosa pine - 118 
Neosakuranine - 46 
Neoza - 118 
Nerinzil - 56 
Nerolidol - 166 
Nerunjee - 56 
Nerunji - 56 
Netar - 191 
Neyyi - 204 
Nhana gokhru - 56  
 405 Nicotiflorin - 17 
Nikocaka  - 118 
Nila- 150 
Nilagiri - 222 
Nilagiri - 222 
Nilagiri enne - 222 
Nilagiri taila - 222 
NilagiriTailam - 222 
Nilampala - 38 
Nilgiri tail - 222 
Nīra- 208 
Nirati Muthu - 180 
Niridi - 180 
Nirkanca - 68 
Nirubuduki - 70 
Nirudu - 180 
Nitric Acid - 322 
Nitric a cid AsT - 253 
Nitric acid Sp. - 257 
Nitric Acid, Dilute - 322 
Nitric Acid, x N - 322 
n-Nonacosane - 136 
Nonapeptide  - 149 
Norwedelic acid - 84 
Norwedelolactone - 84 
Nuranji vamu - 78 
Nutrient Agar Medium - 271 
Nutrient Broth Medium - 271 
Nuvvulanune - 224 
Ocimum kilimandscharicum Guerke - 
210 
n-Octacosanol - 136 
Octadecadienoic  -2 
Octadecanoic -2 
Oddalinine - 81 
Oil of wintergreen - 202 
Okharadi - 182 
Ola-kochu -5 
Oleanolic acid - 125 
Oleanolic acid - 184 
Oleic -53, 119, 153  
Oleo -dilinolein - 93, 119  
Oleum Gaultheriale - 202 
Oma - 78 
Omakki - 78 
Oman - 78 Orientin  - 55 
Orila - 139 
O¾°hopamaphal ¢- 19, 21  
Ovaa - 124 
Ovaapaan - 124 
Ovaa phul - 226 
Ovatodiolide - 162 
2α,3α,19α,23-Oxalacetic acid- 125 
Oxalic  acid - 188 
7-Oxo-onocer -8-ene-3β,21α-diol- 10 
Oxyberberine - 33 
P. fascicularis Lamk.  - 86 
P. rosea L. - 133 
P. spicatum  Roem and Schult - 185   
P. spicigera  L. - 142 
P. tectorius Soland. ex Parkinson - 86 
P. tomentosa Roxb.  - 122 
P. typhoideum  Rich.  - 185 
Paan - 124 
Paani - 208 
Paani - 208 
Paan icikaa - 173 
Paaniri - 88 
Paatalai Kayyaantakarai - 83 
Paatharchur - 124 
Paavatlegida  - 122 
Paccha guntagalijeru - 83 
Pacchare - 131 
Pada - 54 
Pala- 120 
P¢lanik¢- 175 
Palagunda - 7 
Palalkkodi - 73 
Palatige - 73 
Palisade Ratio -240 
Palleru - 56 
Palmatin e- 33 
Palmitic  – 53, 119, 153  
Palmitic and pentadecanoic acids -2 
Palmito -dilinolein - 93, 119  
Palmito -oleolinolein - 93, 119  
Panachchi - 173 
Panachi - 173 
Panampuvatti - 163 
Pananchi - 173  
 406 Panasa  - 120 
Panchadhara - 218 
Panchasara - 218 
Panckirai - 187 
Pandanaceae - 86 
Pandanus odoratissimus Roxb.  - 86 
Pandra veda muska - 169 
Pani- 208 
Panikkurukka - 124 
P¢nīya- 208 
Pankharaaj - 158 
Pannaikkeerai - 148 
Panumbus - 163 
Papaayaa - 47, 49  
Papadi  - 122 
P¢pa²¤ - 122 
Papai - 47, 49  
Papain  - 48 
Papaiyu - 47, 49  
Papari  - 122 
Papat  - 122 
P¢pa°aª - 122 
Papata kammi  - 122 
Papaya - 47, 49  
Papeyaa - 47, 49  
Papita - 47, 49  
Papitaa - 47, 49  
Pappaay - 47, 49  
Pappadi  - 122 
Pappali - 47, 49  
Pappar mulli - 26 
Pappiyaa - 47, 49  
P¢rasika tagara - 129 
Par´ayav ¢n¤ - 124 
Parampu - 142 
Paringi - 47, 49  
Parpadangam - 54 
Parpataka - 54 
Parpatakamu - 54 
Parpatakapullu - 54 
Parro t seed - 92 
Parsiaoshan - 16 
Pasu Nei - 204 
Pasu Ney - 204 
Paterchur - 124 P¢tha- 208 
Patharchura - 124 
Patrasaki - 63 
Patrasnuh £ - 127 
Patta  Karie - 127 
Pattaa jvaayana - 124 
Patterns & Reeders indicators 0.1per 
cent solution -  323 
P¢vaka  – 94, 96  
P¢vakam  - 92 
Pavati  - 122 
Pavatta  - 122 
Pavattai  - 122 
Pavetta indica  var. tomentosa  Hook. - 122 
Pavonene - 53 
Pavonenol - 53 
Pavonia odorata  Willd.  - 51 
Pawpaw - 47, 49  
Paya - 208 
Pearl millet - 185 
Pectin - 81 
Pedaliaceae - 224 
Pedda elakulu - 165 
Pedd ayelaki - 165 
Pedunculol  - 197 
Pelargonidin -3-sophorsido -7-glucoside - 
184 
Pemu - 191 
Penduletin - 62 
Pennisetum typhoides  (Burm.) Stapf& 
C.E. Hubb - 185 
Penova - 124 
1-Pentadecene  - 95 
Pentylbenzene - 79 
Peppermin °- Satva  - 216 
Peramutti - 51 
Perelam - 165 
Pergularia daemia (Forsskal) Choiv. - 193 
Peri-elav- 165 
Periya elam - 165 
Persimon - 173 
Perundumbai - 160 
Petroleum  Light - 322 
pH 2.5 wash solution - 260 
Phanas - 120  
 407 Phanasa - 120 
Phanus - 120 
β-Phellandrene - 39 
Phenolphthalein - 323 
Phenolphth alein Solution - 323 
Phenolpthalein indicator - 323 
Phenylanine - 37 
Phloroglucinol - 323 
Pholorglucinol - 235 
Phosphoric Acid - 323 
Phosphoric Acid, Dilute - 324 
Phosphoric Acid, x N - 323 
Physcion  - 87 
Pi´²atagara  - 129 
Picchila loma ºaª- 51 
Picric ac id solution (Trinitrophenol 
Solution)  - 235 
Pilaabhangraa - 83 
α-Pinene – 39, 53, 79, 125, 166 
β-Pinene - 39, 79, 125, 166  
Piperidine - 87 
Pipermint - 216 
Pirampu - 191 
Pirandai- 9 
Pirangi - 47, 49  
Piranta - 9 
Pistia stratiotes L. - 70 
Pitabh ¨¬gar¢ja- 83 
P¤ta-k¢®can¢ra - 131 
P¤tapu¾pakaª- 131 
Pitikarunai - 156 
Pitta Sag - 54 
Plantaginaceae - 189 
Plantaginin - 189 
Plantago lanceolata  L. - 189 
Plavu - 16 
Plumbagic acid - 134 
Plumbaginaceae - 133 
Plumbago indica  L. - 133 
Poaceae (Graminae)  – 185, 206  
Polygonatum cirrhifolium  Royle - 111 
Polypodiaceae - 16 
Pomolic acid - 125 
Ponoso - 120 
Pontederia vaginalis  Burm.f - 68 Pontederiaceae - 68 
Poospala - 145 
Populnin - 31 
Potable Water - 208 
Potadontari  -1 
Potash, Caustic - 235 
Potassium chlorate AsT - 254 
Potassium Chloride - 324 
Potassium Chromate - 324 
Potassium Chromate Solution - 324 
Potassium Cupric -Tartrate Solution - 324 
Potassium cyanide solution Sp. - 260 
Potassium cyanide solution Sp. - 257 
Potassium Dichromate - 324 
Potassium Dichromate Sol ution - 324 
Potassium Dichromate, Solution 0.1N - 
324 
Potassium Dihydrogen Phosphate - 325 
Potassium Ferrocyanide - 325 
Potassium Ferrocyanide Solution - 325 
Potassium Hydrogen Phthalate - 325 
Potassium Hydrogen Phthalate, 0.02 M - 
325 
Potassium Hydrogen  Phthalate, 0.2 M - 
325 
Potassium Hydroxide - 325 
Potassium Hydroxide Solution  - 326 
Potassium Hydroxide, x N  - 326 
Potassium iodide - 256 
Potassium Iodide - 326 
Potassium Iodide and Starch Solution - 327 
Potassium iodide AsT - 254 
Potassium Iodide Sol ution - 327 
Potassium Iodide, M – 327 
Potassium Iodobismuthate Solution - 327 
Potassium Iodobismuthate Solution, 
Dilute - 327 
Potassium Mercuric -Iodide Solution - 327 
Potassium Mercuric -Iodide Solution, 
Alkaline (Nessler’s Reagent) -  327 
Potassium Pe rmanganate - 327 
Potassium Permanganate Solution - 328 
Potassium Permanganate, 0.1 N Solution 
- 328 
Potassium Tellurite - 328 
Pras¢rin¤ Keral ¤ya- 108  
 408 Prasni - 70 
Procyandin - 37 
Prosopis cineraria  Druce - 142 
Protein Estimation - 251 
Protensein - 31 
Protium caudatum  W. & A. -3 
Protodioscin saponin C - 58 
Protodiscin saponin C - 28 
Prototribestin - 58 
Prunasin - 44, 46  
Prunus avium L. – 43, 45  
Pseudomonas aeruginosa  - 278 
Pseudomonas Agar Medium for 
Detection of Flourescein - 272 
Pseudomonas Agar M edium for 
Detection of Pyocyanin - 272 
Pterocarpan - 140 
Pu¾kara-  208 
Pulivanchi - 196 
Pulladi - 139 
Pullaprabbali - 196 
Puncture vine - 56 
Purified Water - 328 
Puruni saga - 101 
Pushwari  - 12, 14  
Pusparasa - 214 
Puspasava - 214 
Putikatada - 163 
Putiri chunda - 26 
Putregu - 163 
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids  - 67 
Qarnful - 212 
Querc etin- 17, 31, 35, 76, 125, 132  
Quercetin -3-gentiobioside -7-glucoside - 
58 
Quinic acid - 37 
Quinine - 65 
Quinones  - 134 
Qurtum - 92 
Raalchaavriksha - 137 
Raffinose - 93 
Ragatpiti - 106 
Rajaªpu¾pa- 86 
Rakta Citraka  - 133 
Rakta -chita - 133 
Raktaphal ¢- 19, 21  Rakto chita - 133 
Randhuni - 78 
Ranga  agyachit - 133 
Rangachitaparu - 133 
Rasi tel - 224 
Rato -chatro - 133 
Reddi varinanubalu- 23 
Resin - 81, 102  
Resorcinol solution - 329 
Rhee- 118 
Rhyncocarpa epigaea Naud - 167 
Ribwort - 189 
Ringani - 26 
Riyaahi Kapphur - 210 
Roda rayana - 135 
Rogan - dalachini - 200 
Rogan Eucalyptus - 222 
Rogana Sarsafa - 220 
Rogana taila - 224 
Roheda - 135 
Rohida - 135 
Rohido - 135 
Rohira - 135 
Rohitaka  - 135 
Rohituka tree - 135 
Romaºara- 191 
Rosaceae – 43, 45  
Rosy flowered lead wort - 133 
Rubiaceae   113, 122 
Rukuna - 129 
Rung - 212 
Rutaceae - 80 
Ruthenium red - 235 
Rutin - 17,76,170 
S. indicum  L. - 26 
Saakhu - 137 
Saal- 137 
Saalam - 137 
Saalapaani - 139 
Saalvan - 139 
Saalvriksham - 137 
Saasive - 220 
Saasve - 220 
Sabar - 127 
Sabinene  - 166 
Sabinyl acetate - 39  
 409 Sabouraud Dextrose Agar Medium - 272 
Sabouraud Dextrose Agar Medium with 
Antibiotics - 272 
Saccharopine - 42 
Saccharum officinarum L. -206 
S-acetyl di hydroasparagusic acid - 42 
Sada Kanchana - 131 
Safed Kulanjana - 59 
Safflower – 92, 94, 96  
Safranin - 235 
Sahad - 214 
Sain- 142 
Sajja - 185 
Sajjai - 185 
Sajjalu - 185 
Sakalapriya - 29 
¹¢kaºre¾tªa- 73 
Sakhara - 218 
Sakhuaa - 137 
Sakkara - 218 
Sakka re- 218 
Saktuphala - 142 
Sala- 137 
¹¢la - 137 
¹¢lapar ´¤ - 139 
Salicaceae - 169 
Salicin - 170 
Salicortin - 170 
Salila - 208 
Salira - 208 
Salix alba  L- 169 
Salka par ´¢¬ga- 158 
¹am£ - 142 
Salmonella - 278 
Saloparnni - 139 
Salpan - 139 
Salpatri - 139 
Saltree - 137 
Salva - 137 
Salvingenin - 125 
Sameravo - 139 
Sami - 142 
Sangalu - 29 
¹a¬kuphalik¢ - 142 
Sanna Bettamu - 191 Saponarin - 116 
Saponin glycosides  - 42 
Saponins - 35, 102, 186, 192  
Sarakhsa - 158 
Sarasiya Tail - 220 
Sarate - 56 
Sariah - 220 
Saris haa- 220 
Sarivan - 139 
Śarkarā  - 218 
Sarkara -206 
Sarkkarai - 218 
Sarpih - 204 
Sar¾apa Taila  - 220 
Sarsasapogenin glycoside - 42 
Sarso ka Saka - 220 
Sarvan - 139 
Sat-ajavayan - 226 
Saunder - 142 
Saurabha nimba  - 145 
Savolikkoti - 108 
Schultze’s Macerat ion fluid - 235 
Screwpine - 86 
Scutellarin - 189 
Sebesten – 152, 154  
Sehu´²a- 127 
Selenite F Broth - 272 
Selinidin - 15 
β-Selinen - 79 
β-Salinene - 125 
Selinum vaginatum C.B. Clarke - 12, 14  
¹elu– 152, 154 
Sendurakam - 92 
Senturakam - 92 
Senturkam – 94, 9 6 
Serpana - 38 
Sesamum indicum L. - 224 
Sesamum Oil - 224 
Sesquiterpene lactones  - 62 
Shaakar - 218 
Shaal tree - 137 
Shaalgaach - 137 
Shaaluaagachha - 137 
Shaalvriksh - 137 
Shaalvriksh - 137 
Shala - 137  
 410 Shalpaani - 139 
Shalpurni - 139 
Shalwan - 139 
Sham i- 142 
Shevanti - 61 
Shikimic acid - 37 
Shirsiche Taila - 220 
Shiva -malli - 150 
Shiva -nimba - 150 
Shorea robusta Gaertn. - 137 
Shoreaphenol - 138 
Shushunishaak - 148 
Siali-193 
Siguri  -1 
Sij- 127 
Sikt¢- 218 
α-Silenene - 62 
Silver Nitrate Solution - 329 
Silver Nitrate, 0.1 N - 329 
Silver spiked cock’s comb - 148 
Si¼hik¢- 26 
Simlu - 32 
Sinni -maram - 99 
¹iraªº¦lakar ¤- 38 
Siravaari - 148 
Siriportlagida - 189 
Siriv¢lik¢- 148 
Siriyaari - 148 
Sit¢- 218 
Sitaamp u- 106 
Sitak ¢´da- 75 
¹itašiva - 210 
Sitas¦ra´a-5 
Sitasavaram - 108 
Sita tavak ¾¤ra- 7 
¹itav¢ra- 148 
Sitiv¢ra- 148 
¹itiv¢raka -  148 
β-sitosterol -2, 10, 17, 20, 22, 42, 53, 73, 
87, 89, 93, 121, 136, 153, 155, 157, 162, 
174 
Sitosterol glucoside - 125 
β-Sitosterol glucoside  – 174, 184  γ- Sitosterol glucosides - 184 
Sivanar vayambu - 150 
Sivanarvembu - 150 
¹iva-n£l£ - 150 
Skimmianine - 81 
¹le¾m¢taka – 152, 154  
¹l¤pad¢rikanda  - 156 
Sodium bicarbonate - 256 
Sodium Bicarbonate - 329 
Sodium Bicarbonate Solution - 330 
Sodium Carbonate - 330 
Sodium carbonate, anhydrous AsT - 254 
Sodium Chloride - 330 
Sodium Chloride Solution – 288, 330  
Sodium hydroxide – 256, 330  
Sodium  Hydroxide  Solution - 331 
Sodium  Hydroxide  Solution , Dilute - 331 
Sodium Hydroxide, x  N - 331 
Sodium Potassium Tartrate - 331 
Sodium Salicylate - 254 
Sodium Sulphate (anhydrous) - 332 
Sodium Thiosulphate - 332 
Sodium Thiosulphate, 0.1 N - 332 
Sogade - 115 
Solafuranone - 28 
Solanaceae - 26, 75 
Solanum  anguivi Lam.  - 26 
Somanaadikaayam - 113 
¹onitavar ´¢- 104 
Sorisha Tela - 220 
Sottaikala - 163 
Soxhlet Modification of Fehling’s 
solution - 333 
Sperage - 41 
Sph¦rjaka - 173 
Sph¤tak¤°¢r¤ - 158 
Spiked millet - 185 
α-Spinasterol -2 
Spirostanol glucoside - 42 
Sprk - 160 
Sp¨kk¢ - 160 
Spunge t ree- 142 
¹rihastini - 66 
Sripras ¦na- 212 
¹r¤v¢raka- 148  
 411 ¹¨¬gapu¾p¤- 88 
Sruvav ¨k¾a - 163 
Standard dithizone solution - 260 
Standard Invert Sugar Solution -333 
Standard lead solution - 257 
Standard Stains - 255 
Stannated hydrochloric acid AsT - 254 
Stann ous Chloride solution AsT - 254 
Stannous Chloride Solution -333 
Stannous Chloride -333 
Staphylococcus aureus  - 279 
Star Anise of China - 171 
Starch - 237 
Starch Estimation - 248 
Starch Soluble - 333 
Starch Solution  - 334 
Stearic  -53, 119, 153  
Stearo -dilinolein - 93, 119  
Stearo -oleolinolein - 93, 119  
Steroid glucosides - 42 
Steroid glycosides  - 178 
Steroidal saponins  – 28, 58, 112 
Sterols - 65, 159 
Sth¦lail¢ - 165 
Sthir¢- 139 
Stigmast -4-en-3,6-dione - 87 
Stigmasterol - 17, 74, 87  
∆7 –Stigmasterol - 93 
Stigmasterol 3 -O-beta-D-
glucopyranoside  - 69 
Stomatal Index - 240 
Stomatal Number - 242 
Subhra - 218 
Succinic acid - 188 
S¦cigucch ¢- 41 
S¦cipu¾pa- 86 
Sucrose - 341 
Sudan Red III - 235 
Sugandh ¢- 160 
Sugandha -bala- 51 
Sugandhapatra taila - 222 
Sugandhi bach - 59 
Sugandhidru - 38 
Sugar - 218 
Sugar Estimation - 248 ¹ukan¢s¢ - 167 
Sukla - 218 
Sulfuretin - 184 
Sulphamic Acid - 334 
Sulphate esters of 1 -coumarylglucose - 17 
Sulphovanadic acid (Mandelin’s 
reagent)  - 235 
Sulphur dioxide - 338 
Sulphuri c acid + orthophosphoric acid 
mixture  - 334 
Sulphuric Acid - 334 
Sulphuric acid AsT - 254 
Sulphuric acid Sp. - 257 
Sulphuric Acid, Chlorine -free- 334 
Sulphuric Acid, Nitrogen -free- 334 
Sumlu - 32 
Surabhinimba - 145 
Surali - 148 
Suranti - 180 
Suravaali - 148 
Suravaali - 148 
Suravaali - 148 
Sushunimaak - 148 
Su¾ira k¢´²aª- 90 
Sutr¢grapatr ¢- 111 
¹vada¼¾tr¢- 56 
Sv¢duka´°aka- 56 
¹vetakula ®jana- 59 
Sveta veda muska - 169 
¹veta veda mu ºka- 169 
¹veta vetasa  - 169 
Sweet Cherry – 43, 45  
Swertiamarin - 116 
Swertisin - 116 
Sylswertisin -5-O-glucoside - 116 
Sylswertisioside - 116 
Syna ntherias sylvatica  Schott Gen. 
Aocja  -5 
Syzygium aromaticum  Merril & Perry - 
212 
Taalampu - 86 
Tagar ganthoda - 129 
Taila  - 224 
Tailapar ´a Taila  - 222 
Tailaparna - 222  
 412 Taja tail a- 200 
Takkola  - 171 
Takkolpputtil - 171 
Tal taila - 224 
Talai - 86 
Talaneeli - 108 
Tambu - 142 
Tannin – 186, 238  
Tannin  rich foliage – 143 
Tannir - 208 
Tanu tvak taila - 200 
Taraxerol - 10 
Tartaric Acid  - 335 
Tartaric  acid- 188 
Taur - 131 
Tavakira - 7 
Taxifolin - 125 
Tazampu - 86 
Tazha - 86 
Tazhai - 86 
Tecomella undulata  (Sm.) Seem.  - 135 
Tecomin (veratroyl β-D-glucoside)  - 136 
Tectochrysin - 46 
Tejana - 191 
Tekkit - 66 
Tela Kuccha - 19, 21  
Telkkat - 66 
Telkodukkai - 66  
Tella iswari - 88 
Tella mul aka- 26 
Tellagalijeru - 101 
Tellamanga - 113 
Temburni - 173 
Temru - 173 
Ten- 214 
Tendu - 173 
Tepari - 127 
Terkkat - 66 
α-Terpinene - 166 
β-Terpinene - 166 
γ-Terpinene - 125 
Terpinen ol- 166 
α-Terpineol - 166 
δ-Terpineol - 166 
Terreside A and B - 58 Terre striamide  - 58 
Terrestroneoside - 58 
Terrestroside F - 58 
Terrestrosin - 58 
Terrestrosin J - 58 
Tetracosanol - 188 
Tetrahydropalmitine - 33 
Tetrathionate Broth Medium - 273 
Tetrathionate -Bile-Brilliant Green Broth 
Medium - 273 
Thaale hou - 86 
Thaikal - 196 
The Greater Cardamom - 165 
Then - 214 
Thën- 214 
Thioglycollic Acid - 335 
Thor - 127 
Thor veta - 191 
Thorkantalo - 127 
Thujone - 39 
Thymol - 125, 226  
Thymus vulgaris  L. - 226 
Tidbaghuri - 26 
Tidbhagnri - 26 
Tikka  malli - 113 
Tikul - 196 
Tikur - 196 
Til taila- 224 
Tila tail - 224 
Tila Taila  - 224 
Tilataila - 224 
Tilli taila - 224 
Timbaravo - 173 
Tindoran - 19, 21  
Tinduka  - 173 
Tirunitripachcha - 38 
Titaveen - 38 
T-murolol - 62 
Toddalia aculeata  Pers.  - 80 
Toddalia asiatica (L.) Lam.  - 80 
Toddaline  - 81 
Tokaapaanaa - 70 
Toluene - 335 
Tonde balli - 19, 21  
Tondlee - 19, 21  
Toop - 204  
 413 Toratti - 180 
Tormentic acid - 125 
Toroni - 59 
Total reducing sugars - 340 
Toya - 208 
Tr¢yam¢´¢ - 175 
Tr¢yanti- 175 
Tr¢yantik ¢- 175 
Trachyspermum ammi  (L.) Sprague - 226 
Trailing coldenia - 177 
Trayama - 175 
Trayamana - 175 
Trayman - 175 
Traymana - 175 
Triacontane – 20, 22, 188  
n-Triacontane - 136 
n-Triacontanol - 87,136  
Trianthema decandra  L. - 101 
Tribulosaponin A and B - 58 
Tribulosin - 58 
Tribulus terrestris L. - 56 
Tribulusamide A - 58 
Triethanolamine 20per cent Solution - 335 
Trika´°aka- 56 
Trilinolein - 93 
Triolein  - 119 
Tripak ¾¤ - 177 
Tripakshi - 177 
Tripar ´¤- 139 
Triple Sugar -Iron Agar Medium - 273 
Tripu¼kh¤- 177 
Tripunkhi - 177 
Triterpenic acid  - 162 
Triterpenoids  – 10, 24, 162, 174, 195  
T¨´aº¦nya- 86 
Tultuli - 101 
Tumbi - 173 
Tumbika - 173 
Tumiki - 173 
Tundpora - 80 
Tu´²¤- 19, 21  
Tu¬ga- 142 
Tuppa  - 204 Tuvaraka  - 180 
Tvak taila - 200 
Typhonium trilobatum Schott - 156 
Ubhi ringni - 26 
Ubhimo ringni - 26 
Udaka - 208 
Unicha - 163 
Upana - 129 
Urea Broth Medium - 274 
Ursolic acid - 125 
¥½and£ - 182 
U¾´asundara - 54 
Utaran -193 
Utarana -193 
Utruli -193 
Uttamani -193 
Uttamarani -193 
Uzarigenin - 195 
Vaaluchi -bhaaji - 187 
Vaamu satva - 226 
Vadagunda  - 154 
Vadh ¦- 160 
Vaginatin  - 15 
Vaginidin - 15 
Vaginol - 15 
Vahillic acid - 134 
Vahni - 142 
Vahni ºikham - 92 
Vaincha - 163 
V¢jimantha - 29 
Vajr¢nna - 185 
Vajr¤- 127 
Vajrakanda -5 
Vajravall ¤- 9 
Valiya chural - 90 
Valiya elam - 165 
Valjawain - 78 
Valuka - 187 
V¢luk¢- 187 
V¢luka– 43, 45  
V¢luk¢-¹¢ka - 187 
Vamu -aku- 124 
Vanasurana -5 
Vanav¨nt¢ka- 26  
 414 Vanbhantaa - 26 
Vanchi - 90 
Vanchi Kanto - 63 
Vanni - 142 
Vanya -a¹vagola  - 189 
Vanya -i¾adgola- 189 
V¢ri- 208 
V¢ripar´¤- 70 
Var¾h¢mbu- 208 
Varu´am- 208 
Vastrara ®jana– 94, 96  
Vastrarañjana - 92 
Vavankataku - 163 
Vein -Islet Number - 241 
Veliparuthi -193 
Velipparuthi -193 
Vellai caranai - 101 
Vellam -206, 208  
Vellanagai -34, 36  
Vellanamai -34, 36  
Vellanava -34, 36  
Vellari - 115 
Vellaruku - 115 
Vellutha thazh uthama - 101 
Veranisatins  – 172 
Vet- 191 
Veta - 90,191 
Vetra  - 191 
Vetraka - 191 
Vicenin - 71 
Vicenin 2 - 184 
Vid¢rigandh ¢- 139 
Vika¬kata- 163 
Vikamkath - 163 
Vikankata - 163 
Vilayati afsantin - 38 
Viral ¢- 173 
Visanika  - 193 
Vitaceae - 9 
Vitexin - 55, 184  
Vogel -Johnson Agar Medium - 274 
Volatile fatty acid - 143 
Vrikshamroti - 180 
V¨nt¢mlaphala  - 196 
V¨¹cikakanda  - 198 Vruvalu - 38 
Vyaakud - 26 
Water - 208, 335  
Water lettuce-  70 
Water, Ammonia -free- 335 
Wedelia calendulacea  Less- 83 
Wedelia c hinensis  Merril - 83 
West Indian Arrowroot - 7 
White Pavetta  - 122 
White willow - 169 
Wild orange tree - 80 
Wiry indigo - 150 
Wollelu - 224 
Worm wood - 38 
Xylenol Orange - 335 
Xylenol Orange Solution - 335 
Xylose -Lysine -Desoxycholate Agar 
Medium -  274 
Yaliya nzerinigal - 163 
Yamaani sattva - 226 
Yamani - 78 
Yamāni ghanasara - 226 
Yav¢n¤gandh ¢- 124 
Yav¢nī satva  - 226 
Yavaan sara - 226 
Yela kalli - 127 
Yugmaphata -193 
Yukeliptus - 222 
Zakum - 127 
Zarishk - 32 
Zarishka - 32 
Zeylanone - 134 
Zinc Acetate – Aluminum Chloride 
Reagent - 288 
Zinc Acetate – Aluminum Chloride 
Reagent - 335 
Zinc Acetate - 335 
Zinc acetate solution 0.05M - 335 
Zinc AsT - 254 
Zingiberaceae - 59, 165 
Zygophyllaceae - 56 
  415 Definitions 
Rasa : 
  
The term ‘Rasa’ refers to the direct and immediate action of a drug when it comes in 
contact with the sense organ of taste i.e. tongue. The existence of different types of rasas 
(tastes) in different substances is attributed to their va rying pancabhautika composition. The 
‘Rasa’ of different substances have definite relationship to the increase or decrease of Dosha and they have certain actions in the body. The drugs are selected keeping in view their rasas (taste) and the predominate do shas in the body of the patient. There are six types of rasas 
(tastes) . In other contexts the word rasa also applied to nutrition to the end product of 
digestion of food, to the first dhatu (tissue) and to the principal metal drug Mercury etc.  
 1. Madura – Sweet   2. Amla – Sour   3. Lavana – salty  
4. Katu (Pungent)   5. Tikta – Bitter   6. Kashaya – Astringent  
  The term ‘guna’ refers to the physico -chemical and also the pharmacodynamic 
properties of drugs and dietary a rticles which are responsible for the action of the respective  
drugs/diets in the body. A total of 41 gunas are described in Ayurveda but out of these twenty are more important.   1. Guru – Heaviness    2. Laghu – Lightness  
3. Sheet – Cold    4. Ushna – Hot  
5. Snigdha – Unctuousness   6. Ruksha – Non – unctuousness  or dryness  
7. Manda – Dullness    8. Teelshana – Sharpness  
9. Sthira – Immobility              10. Chala – Mobility  
11. Mrdu – Softness    12. Kathina – Hardness  
13. Vishada – Clarity    14. Picchila – Sliminess  
15. Shlaks hana – Smoothness  16. Khara – Roughness  
17. Shkshama – Fineness   18. Sthla – Bulkiness  
19. Sandra – Densness   20. Drava – Fluidity  
 Vipaka:  
  Vipa ka is the action of the drug after it has undergone digestive and assimilative 
transformations. The Vipaka of a drug overcomes the action of ‘rasa’ (taste) but is itself overcome by virya; vipaka refers to drug metabolism i.e. action of a drug through drug metabolism. The texts describe three kinds of drug metabolism viz. Katu (pungent) amla (sour) madhura (sweet) responsible in turn for increase in vata, pitta and kapha respectively.  
 Virya:  
  Virya refers to the potency of a drug/drug action such an action is not accounted for 
the rasa, guna or vipaka of a drug. According to the most commonly held view vi rya is of 
two kinds: usna (literal meaning; hot) and sita (literal meaning: cold).  